INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE WEDNESDAY 8 AUGUST 2001 OPENING REMARKS BY MERVYN KINGGood morning everyone.Since the May Inflation Report, the tale of two economies has intensified. Manufacturing is in recession; consumer spending is buoyant. The gap between the growth of services and manufacturing output in the second quarter was the largest since 1980. The impact of a high real exchange rate on the tradable goods sector, including much of manufacturing, and some of services, was alleviated last year by the fastest growth of world trade for over 30 years. With a sharp slowing in the world economy, the downward pressure on the sales and prices of the tradable goods sector has increased. Over the past four years, while profitability in the services sector has remained fairly stable with a net rate of return of around 14% a year, the profit rate in manufacturing has fallen steadily from nearly 11% in 1998, to under 4% in 2001 Q1. This is the lowest figure since 1992. I could go on, and it would be easy to produce a long list of indicators showing weakness in some sectors, and another long list illustrating strength in others. But the task of the Monetary Policy Committee is, despite these sectoral imbalances, to try to maintain an overall balance in the economy.The world economy looks weaker than at the time of the May Report. World industrial production growth is now negative. The Committee has revised down its forecast for the growth of the world economy this year. Much of this results from weakness in the euro area economy, where the faster than expected slowdown reflects weaker domestic demand, in part the result of the impact of higher energy and food prices, on real incomes and hence consumer spending. These effects should depress growth temporarily. Looking further ahead the main downside risks are still associated with the US economy. Manufacturing output in the US fell in June for the ninth consecutive month, led by the ICT sector. Recent revisions to output data suggests that the growth of productivity in recent years was less rapid than had been thought. A reappraisal of the prospects for future output growth could lead to further weakness in investment, asset prices and consumer spending. Elsewhere in the world,
2with recession in Japan and uncertainties about a number of emerging markets, the picture remains one of slower growth and downside risks. But the significant policy easing, both monetary and fiscal, in the United States has yet to have its full impact.Output growth in the UK has fallen. In part, this slowing is attributable to special factors, such as disruptions in transport, adverse weather conditions, and, more recently, foot and mouth disease, but weaker net trade and lower investment in the first quarter have helped to offset strong growth of consumption, both private and public. Manufacturing output has fallen sharply, principally in the ICT sector. Output in the services sector, previously growing at quarterly rates of around 1%, is estimated to have risen by only a relatively modest 0.6% in Q2, and surveys have reinforced the impression of some slowing in services.The Committee had expected that consumer demand would slowly decelerate from its rapid pace over the previous four years. But the annual growth of retail sales to the second quarter of this year was the highest since 1988. And the growth rates of money and credit remain at very high levels. Despite this, the Committee continues to expect that consumption will slow over the forecast horizon because of a lower rate of increase of wealth and a slower growth of employment incomes than has occurred in recent years. Government spending is now picking up rapidly and contributing to the growth of aggregate demand.In contrast, investment appears weaker than previously thought, and the Committee has been surprised on the downside. It has revised down its projection for business investment, in part because of increased pressure on company finances.RPIX inflation has also been something of a surprise, reaching 2.4% in May and June. But part of this rise reflects temporary factors, including an unusual increase in seasonal food prices, that are unlikely to persist. Volatility of RPIX inflation is likely to continue for some time because of erratic movements in some components of the index described last November as disco dancing, and it will not be easy to see the underlying trend across the crowded dance floor. Looking ahead to the forecast horizon the more erratic movements should give way to a smoother waltz pattern of one, two, 2.5.
3The Committee’s latest assessment of the outlook for growth and inflation is shown in Charts 1 and 2 on page iv of the Report. As usual, these are shown on the assumption that the official interest rate remains unchanged at 5% throughout the two-year forecast horizon. The outlook for growth in both years is somewhat weaker than anticipated at the time of the May Inflation Report. This reflects a more pronounced slowdown of the world economy, a weaker investment outlook, and an unwinding of unplanned stock building. The risks to the central projection are on the downside.The best collective judgment of the Committee on the outlook for inflation is shown in Chart 2 on page iv. The recent rise in RPIX inflation, attributable in part to the one-off price level effects of food prices and excise duties, is expected to wear off over the next year, leading to a temporary dip in inflation. In an underlying sense, inflation changes rather little over the two-year forecast horizon, picking up slightly towards the end. The Committee judges that, on balance, the risks to inflation are somewhat on the downside looking two years ahead. As in earlier Reports, there are differences of judgment among the Committee about this outlook, with some preferring a slightly higher and others a lower central projection, and there are similar differences in views about the risks to inflation.At last week’s meeting the Monetary Policy Committee discussed these projections in the light of the imbalances in the economy. To cut rates would run the risk of overstimulating consumption, and exacerbate the size of the adjustment that will ultimately be required. To fail to cut would run the risk of undershooting the inflation target and unnecessarily depress activity. No-one pretended that the decision was easy. It is true that markets were not expecting a reduction in interest rates last Thursday, although the possibility of some further reduction over the next 2-3 months was priced into financial contracts. In itself, it was unfortunate that we sprang a surprise but the Committee was faced with a choice – to surprise people last week by cutting rates, or to surprise them today by publishing a forecast which indicated that a further cut was likely. It decided to take the simpler and more straightforward course of making a modest reduction in interest rates to keep inflation on track to meet the inflation target looking some 2 years or so ahead.