INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE WEDNESDAY 14 NOVEMBER 2001 OPENING REMARKS BY MERVYN KINGGood morning everyone.Since the terrorist attacks in the United States the economic scene has been dominated by growing evidence of a slowdown in the world economy. That slowdown has been marked. Last year the growth of world trade was the fastest for over 30 years. This year world trade is likely to grow at its slowest rate for nearly 20 years.Policy has responded quickly. This year the Federal Reserve has lowered rates on ten occasions, the Bank of England on seven and the European Central Bank on four. Since 11 September interest rates have been cut by 11⁄2 percentage points in the United States, and by 1 percentage point in both the UK and the euro area. Fiscal policy is either accommodative – allowing the automatic stabilisers to work – or expansionary – with higher discretionary spending in the US. This substantial easing of policy around the world is expected to lead to a recovery in world trade and output growth during next year.At home, growth has remained higher than in any of the other G7 economies. And unemployment is now lower than in any other G7 country for the first time in more than 40 years. The first estimate for output growth in Q3 was 0.6%, above the rate assumed in August. And there were significant revisions to national accounts data implying stronger consumption and domestic demand. So far, there have been few signs of any slowdown in consumption, and the growth rate of total lending to individuals in the third quarter was at a ten-year high. The imbalance between strong consumption and a weak trade position continues. What this means is that net trade will make a negative contribution to economic growth in this country for the sixth year in a row and further negative contributions are expected over the next two years. An illustration of the imbalances is that services output rose by 31⁄2% over the past year, whereas manufacturing output fell by 3% over the same period.
2The labour market shows signs of starting to turn. The numbers published this morning show that employment fell and unemployment rose on the LFS measure in the three months to September. And the claimant count for October was up slightly.Surveys of businesses and households show further prospective declines in manufacturing, lower investment intentions, and signs of slowing growth in the service sector. But, although weaker, they have not fallen as sharply as in the rest of the industrialised world.Price and cost pressures remained subdued. Oil prices have fallen by around five dollars a barrel since the August Report. Other commodity prices have also been weak – metals prices, for example, have fallen more than 20% this year. These falls have fed through to input prices which are well down on a year ago. RPIX inflation itself has been close to target, and its month-to-month movements continue to reflect volatile changes in food, petrol and other commodity prices.The Committee’s latest projections for output growth and inflation are shown in Charts 1 and 2 on page iii of the Report. As usual, these are conditional on the new level of the official interest rate of 4% over the two-year forecast horizon. The growth rate of output over the previous four quarters is, initially, higher than in the August Inflation Report. Upward revisions to past data, and faster than expected growth in Q3, mean that the four quarter growth rate from which the forecast starts is some 1⁄2% higher than was expected in August. The central projection implies a slowing in growth over the next few quarters, reflecting the weak outlook for the world economy in the short term, before picking up to around trend in the second year of the forecast horizon as the policy easing feeds through. Private consumption and investment growth are expected to slow noticeably over the next year or so, although public spending will help to maintain the growth of total demand. The main risks to the outlook surround the world economy, the evolution of the imbalances in the UK economy, and the sustainability of the exchange rate.The best collective judgment of the Committee on the outlook for inflation is shown in Chart 2 on page iii. RPIX inflation is expected to fall in the short term, primarily because of lower petrol prices. It is then expected to remain broadly flat before picking up towards the target level at the end of the forecast horizon. The Committee judges that, on
3balance, the risks to inflation are a little on the upside looking two years ahead because of the risk of a lower exchange rate.Growth is likely to slow over the next few quarters. But a slowdown is not the same as falling output. The Committee does not believe that a recession in the UK is the most likely outcome. In the short-run, inflation may be a little below target. But the considerable policy stimulus – both monetary and fiscal – around the world should lead to a recovery in world activity and demand for UK output. The Committee believes that the most likely outcome is that inflation will be broadly stable and close to the target. The main shift in the MPC’s projections since August has come from news about the world economy. And it was news about the world economy, and the impact of that on the UK, which led to a revised outlook for inflation and hence the reduction in interest rates last week.