Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 11th August 2010
Mervyn King: Jenny Scott:Hugh Pym, BBC News:Mervyn King:Alex Brummer, Daily Mail:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010Let me throw it open to questions.Can I ask you just to say who you are and who you represent, please? Thank you.What do you think is the biggest problem for the economy - inflation staying well above target or growth slowing down to not very much?These are reflections of the same thing, that is the shocks that have hit the economy, beginning with the extraordinary downturn in the autumn of 2008. This is an unprecedented period, coming after a period when we've had enormous stability. We've seen in very short order a collapse of world trade, falling at a faster rate than during the 1930s; output in theUK 10% below where it woudl have been had this crisis not occurred; unemployment fortunately has not risen as much as one might have feared given that fall in output, but it's still a million higher than it was; large price level shocks; 25% depreciation of the exchange rate.It’s quite difficult to imagine many periods when there were quite so many shocks that accumulated at the same time. And I think it's sensible to see them as all part of the same sequence of developments that have occurred in the past two years.You've downgraded your GDP forecasts here in this report, yet we've had in the last couple of weeks some rather upbeat data. We had very strong second quarter GDP data, and some much better trade data yesterday. I just wondered how you reconcile those two positions.The trade data are more likely to affect the composition of demand rather than a judgement that the ONS will reach about the actual path of output. But it is encouraging that the data for
Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010exports now appear to be somewhat closer to the more optimistic surveys, and there's a chart in the Report which shows that - that gap between the surveys and data has narrowed. And I think that's encouraging in terms of the outlook for the gradual rebalancing that we will need.What is certainly true is that - it may surprise some of you - but actually if you go back to the projections we made a year ago, output growth over the past 12 months - you seethis on page 48 - this is the forecast we made in May 2009. If you look atthe Chart B at the bottom there on page 48, if you look at where the data - the red line showing the actual data - has reached in the last observation of the Q2 output data, you can see that it's in the upper part of the fan chart. So that over the past year output growth has been slightly stronger than we had expected a year ago, and output growth in the first half of this year has in fact been a little stronger than we'd expected in either February or May.Now there are always deviations of outturns from numbers that one might have expected, so I don't attach great significance to that. But I think it's quite interesting that, when a year ago people said that the forecasts we were making were wildly optimistic, actually output growth over the last year has been slightly stronger than we were projecting in the middle of last year.I think the reason why we've made a small change - it's not a dramatic change - but it's those three factors I mentioned. The surveys have clearly weakened in the last two or three months. Now that could easily reverse itself,and I wouldn't want to put too much weight on that. But I think one has to take account of the fact that the surveys have weakened quite markedly.Credit conditions are not easing as rapidly as we had expected when we started to imagine how quickly we would come out of the
Alex Brummer, Daily Mail:Mervyn King:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010financial crisis, so that they are easing slightly, but nowhere near as quickly as we had expected. And the fiscal consolidation, although removing the downside risks, has altered somewhat the path of output over the forecast horizon. That adds up to a modest downgrading, but it's not dramatic.Does bank lending make any difference to that forecast; the fact that there does seem to be a belief, certainly in the business community, that credit is not available at the terms at which they would like to get it, without bells and whistles, I suppose, attached - upfront fees, security and all the rest of it.Well, there's no doubt that the terms on which credit is being made available, relative to Bank Rate, have changed significantly in the last two years. That's hardly surprising given the problems which the banks have faced, and the higher funding costs which they must pay in order to obtain funds in order to lend on to business. But there's been a very significant change on the supply side there, that's true.Now the impact of that on the overall recovery of the economy is much harder to judge because a large proportion of investment - around 80% - is carried out by large companies, and what we've seen in the last year anda half is that large companies have been able to issue new equity, issue company corporate bonds. They've found a way of obtaining finance for investment by going around the banking sector.The problem of the adverse terms on which credit is being made available by banks is particularly severe for the SMEs which rely much more heavily on bank lending than do the larger companies. But I think that what we've seen in terms of bank lending, where lending to non-financial companies has been falling, that is not inconsistent with a recovery. You can still have a recovery with
Sam Fleming, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010that. Nevertheless, it's heavily focused on the contribution of bigger companies, and there are particular problems facing smaller companies.Last night we had a very downbeat assessment from the US Federal Reserve, basically indicating that we could see a downgrade to their growth outlook. How concerning is the situation in the US in terms of the hopes for a rebalancing of the UK economy towards net trade? And is it fair to say that some of those downside concerns overseas have shifted away from the Eurozone recently and back towards the US?It's obviously not good news. We need a strong recovery in the rest of the world in order to see the rebalancing of the UK economy. I wouldn't want to exaggerate what is happening in the United States; there have been some signs of weaker data. But I think the policy measures that they announced yesterday were much more ones that designed to maintain the stance of policy to prevent an inadvertent tightening of policy through the purchases of assets that had maybe repaid earlier than might have been expected. So what they're proposing to do is to reinvest the principal repayments on the assets which they bought before. I interpret that as largely being to try to maintain the relatively easy stance of policy which they'd adopted, rather than to move a lot further. But not doubt in the coming weeks we'll hear more from the Federal Reserve and we'll see how the outlook develops.But, you know, I wouldn't want to exaggerate at this stage. It would be wrong to draw strong conclusions. But clearly we do want to see a strong economy, not just in the emerging markets very much in Europe - our largest trading partner - but also in the United States.
Sean O'Grady, The Independent:Mervyn King:Sean O'Grady, The Independent:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010Recently the Office for Budget Responsibility implicitly, and the National Institute explicitly, put the chances of a technical double dip recession at about one in five. Looking at your fan chart, the sort of odds you put on it would be slightly better than that. Perhaps you could explain why you have that outlook?Well, we don't make forecasts for quarterly growth rates, so we don't actually produce forecasts for that technical definition. I think what you can see and what's much more important for policy, is that the broad outlook is still to have, for our central view, growth close to - perhaps slightly weaker than it has been in the first part of the year - but very close to trend, but with downside risks.And the nature of those risks is pretty clear. I think one of the biggest risks facing the UK, what is happening in the rest of the world - we do need to see a recovery. Now I think the trade data that we saw yesterday are, in so far as they go, encouraging in the sense that in the last three quarters we've seen two strong quarters for exports and one weak quarter. Far be it from me to put too much weight on one set of numbers; these data are difficult to interpret. But we do need to see a rebalancing; we need to see growth led by net exports, and perhaps we will start to see more sign of that coming from ht e euro area and elsewhere over the next year. Certainly we need that.And just one supplementary. Are you at all concerned about the fact that business and consumer surveys of confidence that you mentioned earlier on seem to have been hit quite badly by the Budget, even before the real spending cuts have taken place?Well, I think it's difficult for us to know at this stage what has actually led to the downturn in business and consumer confidence. It's not dramatic yet; it's clearly noticeable. And we'll
Paul Wallace, The Economist:Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010have to see how it goes and whether it actually leads through to softer spending on consumption and investment. I think it's just too soon to judge that, and anyone who can forecast where these consumer confidence and business confidence measures go, I think is - you know, I don't think anyone can do that.So we'll watch it very closely. It's clearly a relevant indicator and, as I've always said, the great virtue of monetary policy is that we make it once a month, so that we can come back to this month in, month out, and see how these indicators and the data unfold. And policy can respond accordingly.How much of the downgrade to growth since May can you attribute to the accelerated pace of fiscal consolidation, bearing in mind that the softening in the business confidence and consumer confidence surveys, that you also mentioned, has been attributed to the austerity Budget in June?Well, as I say, I can't judge how much of the change in confidence can be attributed to the Budget. We have made some allowance for those softer levels of confidence. That may reflect confidence based on judgements about what people see happening in the rest of the world, and their advance orders. So I think it's premature to link that - those confidence measures - to the Budget. I don't think much of the softening can be linked to the Budget, and as I said it's offset by the reduced downside risks which the Budget brought about through removing the possibility of a sharper downturn in output resulting from higher long-term interest rates. So those factors broadly offset each other.And I think, you know, we are certainly concerned about the fact that credit conditions have not eased as quickly as we had expected when we started to form judgements at the middle and
Paul Wallace, The Economist:Mervyn King:Laurence Norman, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010end of 2009 about how quickly the credit crunch would ease. It is not easing as rapidly as we had thought at that point.Can I just come back on that? So can you just give us a sense - we've got this downgrade - can you give us a sense of how much you attribute directly to the Budget and the extra measures?Well, not much, because I say - it's a small downgrade in the central projection, but it's offset by lower downside risks, smaller downside risks which are directly attributable to the Budget. And I think those two things broadly offset each other in terms of the average growth rate that you might expect.A couple of questions, if I may. Firstly, you said right at the end of your statement something along the lines of - in whichever direction monetary policy moves in the coming months, you'll keep the focus on medium term inflation. Does that mean that you think policy can't stay where it is for very long, and is there a significant chance that the Bank may need to do more quantitative easing?And secondly, for the CPI, you're saying now that inflation will remain above target throughout next year. Why wouldn't that affect inflation expectations, and is there anything the Bank can do to ensure that it doesn't?On the first part, the comment was merely trying to make clear again that we look at monetary policy every month. And we are prepared to leave it unchanged or to loosen it or to tighten it as our judgement appears relevant at the time. So, you know, it's a decision that is made every month when we come to it and look at it afresh.
Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010On the second, I think the reason for believing that this will not affect inflation expectations - and there's clearly a risk because the experience of higher inflation could change inflation expectations - is partly that in the past two years we do not see any evidence of the ups and downs of inflation having altered inflation expectations in the medium term - there's no evidence of that in financial markets, and the staff in the Bank did a very careful analysis of the surveys of inflation expectations for the medium term. The short run expectations have clearly risen, as indeed have ours. But in the medium term have remained close to the long run average levels.And I think it would be reasonable for someone looking at this to ask the question - what have been the short run price level shocks which have hit the economy? Would it have been sensible to have tried to offset them? And what could we have done? We could have raised interest rates very significantly in order to try to prevent inflation going up first of all to 5.2% and then to 3.7%. Now we didn't do it in 2008 - many of you I think thought we should have been cutting interest rates a lot sooner than we did. But no one was suggesitng that we should be raising interest rates rapidly to prevent inflation going to 5.2%, because people could see through the price level shock and they would expect that the underlying conditions would bring it back - as indeed it did.And equally, if we had raised interest rates significantly above their current very low level to prevent inflation going to 3.7%, we would have had to turn the economy back into recession again. Starting from the point when output is 10% below the level that it would have been on hadthe crisis not occurred, and with a million more unemployed people, far from increasing our credibility, I think we'd have undermined our credibility to have acted in that way, because the remit that we're given makes very clear that
Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010we're supposed to allow temporary deviations of inflation from target where they might otherwise lead to undesirable volatility in output.What we're trying to do now is generate a steady recovery, but to keep inflation close to the target. I think our judgement is - and it can only be a judgement - but I put it out to you. Do you think it's a reasonable judgement that with broad money growth very weak, less than 1% a year; with credit to businesses falling; with the labour market with spare capacity, more unemployed people, very low pay growth - if anything the numbers this morning show weaker pay growth than in recent months; with spare capacity in the economy in both the surveys, and given the shock to output that's occurred - all of these things add up to a picture where it seems to me reasonable to say that the medium term inflation outlook is one where - once these immediate price level effects which are masking the downward impact of these longer term factors on inflation - when these price level effects have moved out of the picture - that inflation will come back towards our central projection which is actually below the target.Now that can only be a judgement, and all kinds of unexpected things will happen over the next couple of years. No one can pretend they won't; they will. And we'll have to respond to them. That's what policy should do is to respond to the things that you can't predict. But I think the way to anchor inflation expectations is to present a plausible story and analysis about why inflation has moved in the way that it has, what is happening in the economy now, and whywe think it isa reasonable judgement that, looking ahead, inflation will come back to below the target.Now people may disagree with that judgement, of course, but then we can have a debate about it. But I would say that these
Louisa Bojesen, CNBC:Mervyn King:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010factors driving inflation in the medium term are all pointing very much in the same direction.With the Fed now looking to stimulate the US economy even further by reinvesting the money from maturing mortgage backed securities, and simultaneously looking to cut growth forecasts, does it concern you that it seems that we still are seeing the data pointing downwards, and that that could be the case here as well, that stimulus isn't working on the long term solution of really kick-starting the unemployment figures?No, I think that would be to exaggerate the concerns. Clearly we have to look carefully at what happens in the short run, and we will. And if it is necessary to respond, then we are quite prepared to do that. But the experience of all financial crises suggests that the typical recovery is relatively slow and sluggish, and it takes a long time to use up the spare capacity that's been created.What we've seen so far, in terms of the actual data, has been bang in line with the average of these financial crises in the past. So I think it's much too soon to say that: no, we're struggling to see a recovery. We're seeing the sort of recovery that we should have expected to see, given the real adjustments that were required to make to the scale ofleverage in the financialsector, to the need to restore funding and credit conditions in banking and financial markets, to reduce the level of indebtedness overall,and most of all to see the rebalancing in both our economy and that of the United States that resulted from having large trade deficits and the resulting high levels of domestic demand relative to output.These real adjustments have to take place somehow. There's no way that monetary policy can stop them taking place. We can try to ensure that we smooth these adjustments in such a way that
Jeremy Warner, The Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010we do see a steady recovery. But I think it's unlikely that we're going to see as rapid a bounce-back as we might have seen from a more conventional recession in the past.Given your concerns about credit conditions, is there more that the Bank of England can do itself to ease these conditions? And I'm thinking in particular about perhaps applying some of your QE to small business lending and perhaps a rollover of the Special Liquidity Scheme which is due to start being withdrawn from the end of this year onwards. What more can the Bank do to ease these?I don't think the Bank can do anything other than its normal monetary policy settings, which mean that we could do more quantitative easing, more asset purchases, if we felt that was appropriate. But I think it's not sensible for a central bank to try to get engaged in making judgements about to which sectors of the economy support should be given. And I think that in terms of measures to help particular types of business, small or large, or particular sectors of the economy, that really is down to government. And that is a matter for government. I know they're thinking about it. But that's for them not the central bank. It's not for us to make judgements which are inherently fiscal or political in nature. This is not a monetary issue.In terms of providing funding to the banking system, we've put in place an emergency scheme to deal with a wholly unprecedented experience. That's for three years; itstill has 18 months to run, so it's a long way away, the Special Liquidity Scheme, from being withdrawn. I think we should acknowledge that. There is no reason in my view to extend it. We're beginning to see already the market discriminating among banks, so some banks are able to obtain funding on cheaper terms than others. That's the
Jeremy Warner,Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010functioning of a competitive market, and it's not for the central bank to stand in the way of that and subsidise the weaker brethren.All banks we have talked to, and we are quite confident that all banks have in place a plan to repay the SLS, so there will not be a cliff of repayments when the scheme ends in 2012. But in the long run, if there are financial institutions that find it difficult to obtain funding one has to ask the question, why? And they should be willing to pay the price for that funding in the market; it should be for others supplying that funding to judge the terms on which they're wiling to lend to banks. And I think it's important that banks are willing to borrow at longer maturities, even if it's a higher price of funding than they might have had in the years before the crisis, because that's the new world we're in.But in the long run, any institution that depends on the taxpayer for money, year in year out, and it will have been three years that this scheme will have been in place, one has to ask the question why on earth they are still inthe private sector? So I can'timagine that there will be any argument for extending it and no bank has request us to do it. They know that the scheme is ending and they've made their own plans. I'm not worried about the ability of banks to repay the SLS; we've talked to them about it.It is a world in which banks are having to come to terms with paying more for their funding than they did before. And that gives them difficult judgements about precisely when to go into the market and raise funding. And we've tried in the Bank to encourage banks to take every opportunity where conditions seem right to do that. But it has to be their own commercial judgement.
The Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Steve Hawkes, The Sun:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010Can I have one more question? Governor, you've met with the Prime Minister last week for the first time since the new government was formed. And I guess you discussed the possibility of a double dip, and no doubt you said much the same thing as you've said to us this morning. But my question is - if there is a double dip is there scope for the government to soft pedal on the present pace of fiscal consolidation, or would that be a mistake?Well I think fiscal policy has to be for the Treasury, and that's for the Chancellor to decide. What I would point out is that if the pcae of growth iseither weaker than, or stronger than that in the central projection which the OBR published, then the automatic stabilisers would kick in, and the pace of fiscal consolidation will either be slower or faster than was in that centralpath. And that is something which we always rely on to ensure that fiscal policy can respond to the course of the business cycle.But over and above that the primary burden of adjusting to faster or slower growth, it really is for monetary policy. And we have instruments in monetary policy and assets purchases which we can expand or contract according to our judgement about what is appropriate for the outlook for inflation. And our judgements will be driven by that, but we can move in either direction.Two things, firstly some coverage this week would have you believe the economy is going to fall off a cliff. Can you give us a view if you are more or less confident about escaping a double dip now than you were in May?Well as I said, we don't think about it in those terms at all. What we look at is four quarter growth rates and the path of growth over the medium term. So that's not something that we think about or talk about.
Steve Hawkes, The Sun:Mervyn King:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010Clearly there are risks to the downside of our growth forecast; we made that clear in the Report. Those risks in part come from overseas, we're going through a rebalancing of the economy and it's very difficult to judge the relative speeds with which these sources of demand that we should be relying on, in particular net exports, can pick up relative to the sources of demand that will be slowing down. So that I think is a very hard judgement to make.But I think the changes we've made over the past three months are relatively small. You know, there has been some slightly softer growth outlook in the central projection, but some of the downside risks have been removed. But I think if you look at the fan charts, you'll see that the central view is still a relatively slow, but steady recovery.And just secondly, one bank after another lined up last week to say they were doing enough on lending, and more or less dismissing what you were saying the week before when you talked about heartbreaking stories of small firms unable to tap credit. Who is telling the truth?Well, I have absolutely no doubt that the terms on which credit is being supplied to business, relative to Bank Rate, have deteriorated very significantly since the credit crunch. I don't think any bank would deny that. Banks are not being awkward and bloody-minded in terms of their attitude; they are facing higher costs of obtaining funding. If you look in the Report there is a chart which shows - not for business lending, but it's hard to adjust for the wedge there; there's no standard interest rate - but if you look for mortgage lending, it isChart 1.17 on page 16, page 16, Chart 1.17, the bottom left hand corner.
Steve Hawkes, The Sun: Mervyn King:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010You can see there that after the crisis in 2008 how dramatically the wedge, the spread between the market interest rate, related to our policy rate, and the rate which is being charged to borrowers. So the spread, which banks are earning on the loans that they are making is much, much higher than it was before. And even if you take into account thefact that spreads might have narrowed in 2007 to unusually narrow spreads, this is nevertheless way above where it was before in the average of the decade leading up to this.So this reflects the difficulty that banks have in obtaining funding themselves on terms that they can then lend on to others. And that's why big companies, which are often better credit risks now than the banks themselves, have decided to go round the banking system and insofar as they can to issue instruments themselves directly to institutional investors providing savings. So equity issues, corporate bond issues, are being used to avoid the higher costs of bank lending. That is not something which is open to smaller companies, and hence it's on those companies that the burden has fallen.Now there has been, in our credit conditions survey, some easing, not as fast as we'd hoped, or expected, but some easing of credit conditions to bigger companies; but we see no improvement to small companies. And that's in the credit conditions survey which is produced by responses from the banks themselves.Do you feel they should still do more?I'm not saying they should do more, that's not the issue. I think there's an economic question - we face a banking system that is still badly damaged and which is still trying to repair its balance sheets. It's having to raise funding at very high cost. That makes it difficult for banks to lend, except at what may appear to be high
Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Mervyn King: Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010rates. And banks are still contracting their balance sheets; that's a rational thing for banks to do given the position in which they find themselves.It is however a problem for - particularly smaller - companies and I think there has also been a series of different problems which have been to do with the relationship between banks and their small customers, where news about changes in terms and conditions has come rather out of the blue and often without any warning which can be very difficult for businesses trying to maintain a given facility where the cost and the charges associated with that suddenly change. And there's a great deal of anecdotal evidence which not just we in the Bank, but our agents - I'm sure virtually every member of parliament - has about this happening to banks.But it's not a question of blaming people; this is a direct consequence of the financial crisis that occurred and the damaged state into which the balance sheets of our major banks and lenders were put. And that needs to be put right, and the lessons of history are that it takes a long time for balance sheets to be repaired. And I think we're going to have to go through this for quite some time yet.Governor, you mentioned the impact of the VAT hike on inflation and the Report goes into this. Yet looking at the fan chart I can't really see any evidence of a spike in inflation in January. Could you clarify why that is?This is in January 2011? Yes.
Mervyn King:Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010Well there isn't a spike in January 2011, and the reason is because VAT went up in January 2010. It went back up again from 15% to 17.5%. So the increased effect on prices in that period drops out of the index in January 2011 and is replaced by, if you like, anew quote 'spike' whichcancels out the one dropping out in 2010. So inflation is broadly flat through 2011. And it's only in 2012 - at the beginning of 2012 - that the upward impact of these two VAT increases drops out of the index.There is a chart in the Report which shows the stylised impact of VAT increases - Chart 4.3 on page 32, which shows the reduction in VAT and then the two increases, the return of VAT to its original 17.5% level and then up to 20%. And you can see that from the beginning of 2010 to the end of 2011 that VAT could add anything between a half a percentage point, or one and a half percentage points to measured CPI inflation, depending upon the extent to which it's passed through, which I think is very hard to judge.But that illustrates I think the magnitude of these price level shocks that we have been experiencing. They are very large relative to the movements in inflation that come about through the impact of spare capacity which takes a long time gradually to push inflation down, or when the economy growsfaster, gradually to push inflation up. These are longer run effects and they take time to come through. These short run effects can just swamp everything that you would expect as being the underlying determinants of inflation. And that is why the actual movements of inflation, up to 5.2, down to 1.1, up to 3.7, down again; these things are masking the true drivers of inflation in the medium term to which policy really should respond.So just to follow up on that, would you say the core inflation which, you know, cancels out some of the shocks, would be a better measure to look at?
Mervyn King:David Smith, Sunday Times:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010Well I think the trouble is knowing what is meant by core inflation. If for example you just took VAT out of CPI altogether, then CPIY, that measure, which is excluding VAT, is already now well below target. Now I don't think that is necessarily a good measure of core inflation, because you do not know what would have happened to inflation had the VAT increase not been made at the beginning of 2010. And given the path of nominal spending in the economy, it's quite possible that other goods would have gone up in price.So I think it's a very slippery concept, core inflation, to measure. But the issue of - as we look ahead - when these price level shocks drop out of the comparison, and if there aren't any new ones then it's the beginning of 2012 when that will happen.What will determine inflation at that point will be these longer run factors to do with the growth of money and credit; what is happening to spare capacity and the output gap; the state of the labour market and wagesettlements; inflation expectations. All of these variables will be the key ones that will drive inflation in the medium term.And that's why I say that I think it's not an unreasonable judgement that we've reached so far that all of these factors are pointing to something consistent with our central projection, and are not consistent with the view that ni flation is in some sense out of control or permanently above the target once these masking effects of the price level shocks disappear.Two questions as well, if I may, Governor. The first one, could I ask about the relationship between the forecast and MPC decisions, and just thinking back, do you think the decisions that you took 12 to 18 months ago would have been any different had
Mervyn King:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010you known that inflation would be significantly above target, rather than below target as you were forecasting at the time?Well I think the link between forecast and our decisions is very clear. We look at the outlook for inflation in the medium term. And I think if you want a chart that captures that look at - in the overview - Chart 4, where this is our judgement of the probability that inflation will be above target. And you can see that in the short run we think it's very likely that inflation will be above target. Looking to the medium term, which is when policy has its influence, we think that it's more likely than not that inflation will be below target, although coming back to evenly balanced risks looking some three years ahead. That's the kind of consideration which drives our policy judgements.Now, if the question is - had we had perfect foresight 18 months ago what would we have done? I don't think it's sensible to give an off the cuff response to that because we don't have perfect foresight so it's not an operational question. But b) there are many other things we would have learnt about - but it's very hard for me to see why the policy stance would have been dramatically different. What we've seen - and the big picture in all this, and I think this clearly goes to this discussion about what's been happening in the last two or three years - two years ago, in fact exactly two years ago when we met, I don't think it was reasonable to have expected that world trade would have collapsed at the fastest rate ever, faster than even in the 1930s; That we would have seen a simultaneous downturn in confidence and output around the world; and that output in Britain would suddenly be 10% below where it would otherwise have been.That was a massive shock; everything is dominated by that, absolutely everything, all the data we're looking at is dominated by that shock, and we're gradually adjusting to it. The effects of
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Alen Mattich, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010that on the banking sector, the effects on demand and output; we're going through a long period of recovery that will take, you know, several years before we will adjust back toanything that we can remotely call normal. So I think the dominant picture is that shock, and so the big impact on policy was that. And I don't think a lot has happened in the intervening period to change our view about what you need to do to respond to that shock.And the other question was about that Chart 4 and its relationship with Chart 3 in the overview. I mean wouldn’t logic suggesthat, if there's a 50% probability of inflation being above target, then the centre of the forecast range should be bang on target at the end of the forecast period?That's to do with balance of risks. The central projection is marginally below target, but the risks are on the upside, so that the - if you like the median - what's the chancehtat inflation will be above or below the target? - as you can see in Chart 4, is pretty well itself bang on 50% at the end of the three year forecast period. The central projection is slightly below that because the risks were on the upside.Some economists suggest that the distribution of expected inflation should look more like a barbell than a normal distribution, including members of the MPC. Does your sort of asymmetric approach to inflation suggest that you believe this and that you’d much prefer inflation to be too high than too low?No, I think we want to try and get inflation back to the target. But let me bring in Charlie or Spencer if they want tocomment on the charts we have. I mean we don’t start off with the presumption that inflation follows any particular shape of the distribution. It’s our judgement about what the risks to inflation are which generates the inflation on the charts that we’ve got.
Charlie BeanAlen Mattich, Dow Jones:Charlie Bean:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010Okay you talk about a barbell, and so the distribution has two big lumps either side. If you look at 5.11 on page 41, which is probably the chart which you’re thinking of, and it’s the one that Adam Posen essentially referred to in a speech. To some extent that's an artefact of where you put the buckets here. The point that he was drawing attention to was the fact that essentially the spread of possible outcomes is so wide at the moment that there is a very high likelihood of inflation either being well below target or well above target. And that's what Chart 5.11 essentially tells you.But it’s perfectly consistent with having a distribution of outcomes which has the bulk of the possible outcomes in the centre of the distribution of the sort that we have ni Charts 5.9 and 5.10. So it’s not the case that you have what’s technically called bimodal distribution here. It’s a distribution which has most of the outcomes in the middle but with pretty big tails, one at either side, and that translates a significant probability that inflation could be well below target or well above target, further down the road.Sorry just a very quick second question. Do your projections also include the possibility that the government will renege on its commitments to cutting the deficit?The projections are conditioned on the stated government spending plans; that's that convention. So that's embodied in the forecasts because there are lots of risks either side. We don’t try and enumerate every possible risk that lies within this distribution. It’s quite possible that government spending and taxes may turn out to be different because the level of activity turns out to be different. The Governor earlier on referred to the automatic stabilisers that would kick in if GDP turns out to be different from the central expectation of the OBR or our projections. So away
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010from the central projection, yes, spending could be different, taxes could be different. Do we factor in a whole scale reneging of the government from its fiscal plans? No we assume that they will continue to abide by the framework that they’ve set out.Two questions if I may. Firstly on inflation, since May we’ve had the first splits on the committee since the crisis began. Can you give us a flavour as to how widespread concerns are that inflation might run out of control on the Committee? Is it the fact that you’re just going to see through factors like commodity prices rising and the VAT rise as one-off factors and not really relevant for interest rate setting?I think we always said that we don’t like the word split. Each person votes for a particular level of Bank Rate. In our meeting in July - you'll see the minutes of the August meeting next week; I'm not going to comment on that - one person voted for 0.75% and the majority for 0.5%. I don’t think that's a dramatic difference of view. I think what is very clear is that everyone feels that the foot of the MPC is still firmly on the accelerator but there is a very reasonable debate to be had about precisely how far down that should be and whether it is a time to gradually ease back a little or whether indeed to press down a little harder. Those are the judgements that we always have, and I don’t think you can say that anyone is right or wrong, these are perfectly reasonable views to hold. They’re very small differences.But I think what is very clear is that the Committee unanimously is of the view that this forecast represents the broad picture for the outlook, and that policy should be clearly still very accommodative and is likely to be so for some time. And I think small differences in judgement about minor differences relative to where we are don’t affect that big picture.
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Claire Jones, Central Banking Publications:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010And on the fiscal policy debate, rightly or wrongly you’re seen to have rubber stamped some of the coalition’s fiscal policy decisions. If this turns out - and you've made a call that there’ll be no net impact basically on growth - if this turns out to be wrong, this will raise question marks about your economic judgement.Well I think every time you make a decision or make a comment, we are saying something that people can disagree with, either at the time or, as usually occurs, with the benefit of hindsight. And no doubt you will be able to avail yourself of that in due course. I think all I have done on fiscal policy is to say the same thing only in response to questions or in the case after the election to a written request to make a public comment on it; and I said a year ago that I thought there had to be acredible medium term plan for fiscal consolidation over the lifetime of a parliament - that's five years, and I repeated that after the election. I said no more, and I certainly won’t be engaging in a running commentary on fiscal policy, which may or may not come as good news to you.The Bank mentions in its annual report that it will change from the existing forecasting model to a new forecasting model either at the end of 2011 or at the beginning of 2012. Two questions on this, if I may. First of all do you plan to incorporate things you find out during the research process into the existing model? And also - how do you plan to manage the process of maintaining the credibility of the existing forecastingmodel while at the sametime moving to another one?And just one more quick question, if I may as well, on the Independent Commission on Banking. Now it’s due to report in the coming months on, among other things, the structure of the British banking industry. Now there's been a number of ideas put
Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010forward on this subject. I wondered which of those ideas you think merit serious consideration by the Commission.On that last one I think I can be very simple and quick, which is I look forward to reading the report of the Banking Commission. There are excellent people on it, and I think I'm quite happy to sit back and relax for a little bit and await their views.On the former one I think this is getting a little bit out of hand this story. It’s a bit odd really because this is something that we decided two years ago; it isn’t a recent thing altogether. In a minute I’ll ask Spencer to explain what we’re actually doing. But I think the first point to make very, very clearly is that forecasts are not made by models. Forecasts are made by individuals, a committee, seeing whether they can form a consensus, best collective judgement of the outlook. And we express it not in terms of a number but in terms of a probability distribution. This has been the fundamental principle that we’ve been using for almost 20 years now, forecasts are probability distributions, and they’re judgements of individuals, not outturns of a model.We have many models. Any good economist uses models, not in order to pretend that they are in some sense representative of the real world; they’re not. The whole point of a model is to abstract from an awful lot of things that are going on in the world in order to help you think more clearly about one issue. So most good models abstract from lots of things that are relevant, but enable you to home in on certain things that you want to think more clearly about, where putting it into a mathematical form aids clarityofthought. Butyoudon’taidclarityofthoughtintheendby pretending to yourself that a set of equations is the world. It isn’t, it’s a way of thinking about the world.
Spencer Dale:Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010So we have many models. We’re always updating them and changing them. And Spencer can now say something about the whole research process of which this is merely one part.Thank you and I should start by echoing the Governor’s point. I do think there's a real danger of overstating the importance of economic models. And I think, when you think about this, the one key thing you should bear in mind - which is a point the Governor made - when thinking about any economic model, is - all economic models are wrong, okay. All economic models abstract from reality, and so economic models don’t make forecasts. In our case the Committee makes a forecast; we don’t turn a handle and out pops a forecast. The point of any economic model is to help our thinking and aid our thinking, not to produce a mechanical forecast.What we’re doing: as the Governor said we decided in the spring of 2008 to think about changing our central forecasting model. A central aim of that process wasn’t to try and add in even more tweaks and complications about different aspects of the economy; in fact it was the opposite. Our objective was to actually produce a smaller model which is more tractable and more understandable where the key objective is, if you had a smaller central model, it will be then better able and easier to incorporate the insights from a range, a variety of different models. So you have a central model in the middle and then you’re able to incorporate the insights from a whole range or suite of models.So if you think about this model development project mentioned in the annual report, not just in terms of building a new central model but rather building a platform on which you can incorporate the insights from a whole range of different models.I’ll be really boring and just have one question if that's all right.
Mervyn King: Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Mervyn King: Charlie Bean:It is, splendid.Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010Governor, Section 5 you mention that in order to counterbalance the fiscal consolidation, private sector savings will have to fall, particularly including household savings. You also raise the possibility that households may be so spooked by, inter alia, the fiscal consolidation, that they will save more. What do you think are the chances that people will - that fiscal consolidation will make people behave insuch a way as to worsenthe effects of the fiscal consolidation? And, if so, what will be the fallout from that?Well let me ask Charlie to take that one.I mean, clearly for some households they’re going to be directly affected by the fiscal consolidation. If you’re somebody who is employed in the public sector and face the prospect of perhaps losing your job, the chances are that you may well increase your saving now in anticipation of that. So certainly for some households there may well be a direct effect. It would also betrue that for some businesses, particularly supplying the public sector, they may anticipate lower sales, and as a result, economise on the labour they have, and so forth. So you can obviously see the channels that way.On the other hand to the extent that before the recent Budget announcements some households might have been expecting the bulk of the fiscal consolidation, which would have to come at some time, even if it didn’t come over the next few years; at some stage the government would have to consolidate the public finances. If households thought that was going to come in higher taxes, then they would have been increasing their saving. They now find less of the burden is going to be on taxes, more on spending, so they may well increase their spending rather than
Peter Hoskins, Sky News:Mervyn King:Jenny Scott: ENDPage 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th August 2010reducing it. And the resolution of uncertainty about how the fiscal consolidation would take place in itself may tend to boost spending overall.So it’s quite difficult to form a judgement of the balance of these things. Obviously the key thing at the end of the day is how confident households and businesses are about the prospects for demand incomes and so forth further down the road, which will in turn determine their consumer spending and for businesses their investment decisions.Given the convulsions the world economy, the British economy, has been through in recent years, the inflation target has stayed at 2%. How comfortable are you with it staying that low or that high, depending on your view?No, I'm comfortable with it staying at 2%. I think the difficulty that policies face is that, as you said, the convulsions of recent years meant that actual inflation has been well above it and sometimes well below it; it’s just moved around. And that came after 15 years in which inflation did not move more than one percentage point from the target every single month for 15 years. So this was a big change, and I think that makes it harder for us to explain policy as well as actually to try and work out where inflation is going to go once these shocks disappear. But I don’t think that's an argument for changing the target, I would leave the target absolutely where it is.Thanks very much Governor, thank you.