Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 10th November 2010
Q&AHugh Pym, BBC News:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010Governor, what are the chances of a sharpish slowdown in growth in the first half of next year, partly because of the fiscal tightening?I think it's very difficult and not terribly sensible to focus on just two quarters. Clearly there's always a risk, looking over the next few years, that consumer spending in particular will slow, given the external shocks including the fiscal contraction and the burden of debt that households have.But, the Committee have looked at this. We've taken those risks into account; and even given that possibility, we think there are other risks which mean that overall, even though the risks to growth as a whole are on the downside - we say that in the Report - the central view is clearly not that there will be a significant, sharp slowdown.That there will be a slowdown from the growth rates we've seen in the past two quarters would seem very likely, because they are extremely rapid. And we might be concerned if growth rates of 1.2% were to continue indefinitely; that would eat up the slack extremely quickly and possibly reinforce the upward inflationary pressures. And some of the strength in output in the past two quarters was due to construction, and one would not expect that to continue over a period - I'm not going to forecast the next two quarters; that seems to me almost impossible to do - but over a period you'd expect construction to slow down, given the moderation in public spending.But what we try to focus on in this Report is - don't just look at one component, whether it be fiscal policy, whether it be consumption. Look at all the components. We need a rebalancing; we need
Hugh Pym, BBC News:Mervyn King:Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010consumer spending, public and private together, to slow; we want them to slow. But we want next exports to pick up to see that rebalancing in the UK economy which is the key to getting back to a sustainable position over a five-year period.Do you think now that the impact of fiscal tightening will be greater than you did back in August?No, we haven't changed our view at all. We've had no news on it since the Budget as far as we're concerned. The Budget was the main news which set out the path of fiscal policy as a whole. There was very little news for us in the Spending Review, so we haven't changed our view at all on that.I wanted to see if you could expand a little bit more on your assessment of the risks for net trade improving or deteriorating in the medium term. Part of the reason why I wanted to ask this question is because, if you see the Fed doing additional stimulus, you would assume that there is some weakness present in the world's largest economy, and surely the UK is going to take a knock from that? And I wondered if you could talk a little bit about how the UK growth path can proceed in light of weakness in the world's largest economy? Can you point to strength elsewhere in the world economy that can make up for that?There is no doubt that, in my view, the biggest risk that we face is in the external environment, because we want and need a rebalancing. I think the private sector in our economy is going to insist that there is a rebalancing because they are not going to want to go on increasing indebtedness.So if you look at the short-run picture for exports, it's clear that the overall data, as we describe in the Report, have maybe not picked up overall in the way that we might have thought. But I
Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010think there are two important caveats to that, which themselves go in opposite directions.The first is that, as the Report spells out, if you look at the numbers in more detail, exports of goods have in fact picked up in the way that we might have thought, given world activity and the fall in the exchange rate. What has fallen back has been exports of services, particularly financial services. What is very hard to judge is whether these are measured accurately. And as the Report points out, some of the indicators of activity in those financial service areas where you'd expect fee income to be earned abroad, seem to be fairly buoyant in the survey indicators, but not in the ONS's measure.And I think there must be question marks about whether we capture the activity in the financial services sector accurately. But that we'll see.So there are these two different aspects in the short run data, plus the point I've always made and will continue to make, which is it's less than two years since we saw the end of the period of falling of the exchange rate. This will still be expecting to come through, and it takes a long time before we have accurate trade data. That's not the fault of the ONS; it just takes a long time to get good data on the trade picture.So if you look at the longer-run picture, I think one of the things that we've been struck by is that the reports from our Agents on exports, particularly from medium and small-sized manufacturing firms, have been relatively buoyant. We've had a good news story there. So I think underlying this picture is some news on exports of goods which is consistent, as I say, with our examination of the data.
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010The big challenge for us is that over 60% of our exports go to the euro area, which is not the most buoyant area for demand growth; 7% go to Ireland. So the United States is clearly very important; but it's not the most important export market for the UK, and we are particularly poorly performing in those emerging market areas where demand is the most rapidly growing.So there is a structural issue here about the need to expand exports to those parts of the world where there are greater opportunities.As I say, that issue has been there for some time; that hasn't changed. So the biggest conjunctural risk that we face is bad news on the world economy, and in particular the euro area. That's out of our hands, but it does point very much to the fact that there are - the world economy is facing difficult and dangerous times. And I hope at the G20 meeting this weekend that we will get a co-operative message rather than some of those that we've been getting in the last few days and weeks.I was wondering if you would say that the risk to trade with Europe is the biggest risk that the UK faces from weakness in the euro area, or are there other channels that are more concerning to you, such as weakness in the banking sector?No, I think it's trade with the rest of the world. And I think the risks are on both sides. I mean, some of the growth in parts of the euro area has surprised on the upside, some on the downside. So it's not a picture that entirely goes one way. And, as I say, I think the reports from the Agents, the survey responses by businesses, have actually been fairly encouraging and quite consistent with the view that we've taken about exports here.
Sumeet Desai, Reuters:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010The big picture of this forecast for growth is that we have a fiscal consolidation in place over five years. We have a fall in the real exchange rate of 20% that took place between mid-'07 and the end of '08; that's slowly beginning to come through. But for that to work, for this rebalancing to take place, we need a healthy world economy. And that's very important. And if there were further, major downside movements in the world economy, we would not be immune to that, and that would be a problem.Ahead of the G20, the US is facing considerable criticism from China and Germany about more QE. Has the Bank of England come under any pressure that, if it were to engage in any more QE, that its G20 partners might not be happy with this? And would that in any way sway your decision?None at all, and it would not sway it. I think it's rather baffling some of the comments that have been made. I find it rather difficult to attach much economic sense to it. I have no idea whether the United States should inject more stimulus or not. The Federal Reserve is in a much better position to judge that than me or the MPC. I have great confidence in the United States and the Federal Reserve.But that isn't the issue. The issue you asked is about the instrument, and some of the comments about the instrument of asset purchases seem to me singularly ill judged. Asset purchase - first of all we've been conducting it for almost two years. It's an element of monetary policy that has been written about in textbooks for a very long time. The mechanism by which it works is straightforward. You inject more money into the economy. Those who sell the gilts to us have more money; they then can either buy more gilts - pushing down the yield curve at the longer end - or they can buy unfettered a wide range of private sector assets. This will change risk premia, yields and the cost of
Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010capital on a wide range of assets. There's nothing new or surprising about that. Perfectly standard operation.So if the question is about the instrument of policy, then I think any criticism of that is bizarre, frankly. Whether or not there should be stimulus at this stage is a different question. I'm not in a good position to judge that. That has to be for each country.The concern that the United States has expressed, with some justification, is that they've never intervened to prevent the exchange rate responding in the way the markets thought was appropriate, given its stance of domestic policy. There is a world of difference between deliberately intervening in order to lower or raise the exchange rate, or setting domestic policy and then letting the market determine the exchange rate. There's a big difference between those two.What is most important, however, at present, is that given - as I said - the difficult and dangerous times that the world economy is in, that the world leaders at the G20 have a constructive approach. We are in a position where the world economy can be a win-win outcome; but I'm afraid we're also in a position where it can be a lose-lose. And if we end up with a failure to recognise that there is a collective interest, a genuine collective interest in reaching agreement on the path of adjustment of current account balances over time, then it will be lose-lose, and every country will be worse off as the level of world activity falls.It is very important that the fundamental point that's recognised at the weekend - not decisions on instruments or exchange rates or targets for current account balances in terms of a number - but a genuine recognition that there is a collective interest in the path along which the current account imbalances unwind. And unless we recognise that and reach agreement on what that path is
Daisy McAndrew, ITV News:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010going to look like - not numerically this weekend, but over the next six to nine months - then we will face a situation where more and more countries will resort to policy instruments that will be damaging in the end to everyone.It is that serious, and now is the time - we came together two years ago in Washington at the G7, tore up the communiqué, threw it away; produced a short communiqué which said that, in essence, we have to work together to avoid a worse outcome. And we did that, and it was very successful for a period. And the extraordinary downturn in world trade and output was brought to an end by collective agreement on the action that was necessary.Now's the hard part. Now the part is to work out how we're going to unwind these imbalances. Because the fundamental causes of the financial crisis have not in any way been eliminated. We've just dealt with the short run symptoms of it. Now we have to deal with the causes.On reading this morning's Report, there is one phrase that crops up again and again, which will cause alarm for many, which is - "There is a wider than usual range of views among Committee members". And that's on growth, on inflation and all sorts of things. And obviously when the experts can't agree, it frightens the amateurs, particularly at a time of such low consumer and business confidence. So a comment or two on that, if you don't mind.And also - is it fair to assume that the reason for that lack of agreement on the Committee is that the individuals on the Committee can't decide amongst themselves what the effects of George Osborne's cuts will be on the economy?
Mervyn King:Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010No, I don't think that's an accurate statement. You know, there are many risks and uncertainties. The impact of the fiscal consolidation is merely one, and certainly the impact on consumer spending is hard to judge because we don't know what consumers were thinking would happen 12 months ago when they were making plans for spending. So, there has to be uncertainty. But there's a lot of uncertainty, as I said, about the world. So there's plenty of room to have different judgements.I think people should not be nervous about the fact that there's a range of views. In fact, I would say when I speak to business groups around the country it's the opposite. If I came here this morning and said - look at the problems and challenges we're facing; we're not quite clear what the impact of the world economy or the fiscal consolidation or the fall in the exchange rate or the rise in commodity prices has been, let alone where they'll go in the future. But nevertheless everyone's got an absolutely identical view on every one of these issues with identical path for what that means for output and inflation.You would say - oh, come off it! You can't possibly believe that. Now we think it is much better to be open and honest about that. Where people should take comfort is that every member of the Committee believes that the central path that they would choose is one of recovery. Not an exciting recovery, not particularly rapid, not one that uses up all spare capacity particularly quickly; but one of modest recovery, but with risks on either side. And it's very important also not to say to people that we know what the future holds. No serious person, professional or amateur, is going to believe anybody who says - I know what the future holds. We don't.What we are committed to - and everyone signs up to this - is to monitor very carefully what happens, and then respond in a way
Joel Hills, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010that we think best will keep inflation on track to meet the target. Plenty of room for reasonable people to disagree about exactly what is the right course of policy today or next month. But we have a process in which everyone gives their individual view, and it's the majority view that determines the outcome. That's served us well in the past, and I'm sure it will in the future.The IMF recently described the UK housing market as worrisome. Are you worried about the UK housing market?I worry about many things. I wouldn't say that was the one that was top of my list; I think the world economy is the one that worries me most. We have seen a surprisingly buoyant housing market, given that activity is about half what it was at the peak of the levels of activity before the crisis. We've seen initially almost an effective closure of the mortgage market for six months. Now the banking sector's coming back into it; mortgage rates are clearly well above Bank Rate.But I think there are two very instructive differences between the US housing market, with which perhaps they're more familiar, and the UK housing market. The first is that house prices in the UK did fall in the immediate wake of the financial crisis, but then recovered. They are down 1% on the past three months - some signs of a weakness in activity and prices. But we'll have to monitor where that goes.In the United States house prices are still 26% below their peak. Here's it's about 13%. That's a big difference. The result of that is that, whereas fewer than 5% of homeowners in this country have negative equity, in the United States it's 23% - enormous difference. The result of that is that mortgage arrears, defaults and repossessions are at record post-War levels in the United
Joel Hills, Sky News:Mervyn King:John Hills, Sky News: Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010States, and here they are markedly lower than they were in the '80s and '90s - lower than the '90s, and falling.So, yes, we're always worried, and I don't predict - I can't predict what will happen. But we will monitor what happens and take action to keep inflation on track to meet the target.I ask the question because in future potentially you'll have the power to intervene when you perceive asset bubbles to be forming. I was wondering if you had the power today, whether you or any other member of the Monetary Policy Committee - given that there are a range of views and judgements - would choose to intervene today?The Monetary Policy Committee will not have responsibility for macroprudential policy. That will go to a Financial Policy Committee. The members of that haven't been appointed yet. So I do not presume -You will be on it, would you do that?- I do not presume to speak on their behalf. I will merely speak about the objective, which is not to prick asset bubbles; it is to take actions to maintain the stability of the financial system. That's a very important distinction.Governor, in at least I think three of the last Inflation Reports, you've said that you expect inflation to come down within a two-year horizon, since when there's been no sign of inflation coming down; in fact it's higher - its projection now is higher than it was in August. Growth has also been on the upside of expectations. I just wonder whether you think at some point the Bank is going to have a credibility problem here? The sort of - a crueller man than I might say this is the Saint Augustine view of
Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian: Mervyn King:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010controlling inflation, which is: "Lord, make me virtuous, but not yet." And I just wondered whether you're concerned that at some point people will say - yes, the Bank talks very tough about hitting its inflation remit, but it's not actually doing very much about doing it, and actually might start to take action into their own hands? Is that a risk or a worry, do you think?Well, certainly if that - I mean, the way we would use that is not quite your language, but we would say that if inflation expectations start to move away from target in a way that threatens the behaviour of inflation in the medium term, then we certainly would be concerned. And that is obviously the major upside risk and we talk about that at great length in the Report. So the answer is - yes, we would be concerned about that.The challenge we face is this. I don't think it's particularly puzzling to understand why inflation is where it is. I think it's very important to understand that inflation in the last three years has moved both up and down, so if you go back to the beginning of 2008, almost three years ago, inflation was 2.1%. It then moved up to 5.2%. Then it went all the way down to 1.1%, then it went up to 3.7%, then it came down to 3.1%. It's not all moved in one direction, and it hasn't stayed uniformly above the target. That's -It's been above the target for most of the time.It has, but that's because there've been a sequence of shocks. Now what we have to do is to explain to people, what matters most I think is the policy response.Now, I think if we said to people - gosh you might be worried that inflation would be above target, so what we're going to do is to push up interest rates very dramatically; we'll create deliberately a lot more unemployment in order to push wage growth even
David Smith, Sunday Times:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010further below its very modest growth rate, to bring inflation back, to deal with the short run shocks - I think both you and they would think that we'd taken leave of our senses. It doesn't make sense to respond to price level shocks in that way.What we have to do - and the test of our credibility - is to explain to people why we think inflation has been high, and why we think it's a reasonable judgement that on the balance of risks inflation will be where we think it's going to be in the medium term. But, there's obviously a wide range of uncertainty about this. This is not about pretending to know the future; it's about balancing the risks. And what we have to do is to say - do we think it is sensible in the present juncture to think that the risks on the upside and the downside relative to our target are evenly balanced? We do at present. That's why we haven't changed policy and why the forecast is what it is.Now if you feel that - and we were to come to the judgement that risks were more on one side than the other, we would take corresponding policy action either to ease policy further or to tighten it. But I think our credibility will depend on whether we can convince people that the position we're in a now is a reasonable judgement given the balance of risks.Governor, when you're standing at the crease watching for these incoming bouncers, what is going to influence you most? Will it be the GDP data and the extent and pace at which the output gap is going to be closed? Is it going to be inflation expectations? Will it be money and credit growth? You'll probably say it's going to be all of those things.But in terms of the world economy as well, it seems that the global recovery, like the UK recovery, has been stronger than expected. The IMF says the global economy with grow by 4.8% this year,
Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 20104.2% next. Does your concern about the world economy mean that you just don't believe those kind of numbers?No, I think it doesn't mean we don't believe those sorts of numbers; it means there are risks. After all the danger of publishing a number is to pretend that you think the only thing that can happen is that number. I don't think the IMF do believe that. There are big risks on all sides of this. And I think for activity, we have said we think the risks are more to the downside than the upside. And I think that comes both from looking at the domestic picture for consumption, but also at the world economy.It's a very varied picture in the world. As I said, one of the things that is a slight concern is that so much of over 60% of our exports go to a part of the world that isn't exhibiting particularly buoyant growth and clearly has quite significant challenges within the area in terms of sovereign debt problems. So that has to be a matter of concern to us. We need a healthy growing euro area economy, and we need that to continue for a long time.So I think we would look at all the data, that's inevitable I think. But what we will try to do is to see whether there is a common picture coming out of the different pieces of data we look at.And in terms of the medium term inflation outlook, I think the thing to hang on to is that if you were to come into a country from outside and say - well I'd be interested in the outlook for medium term inflation two or three years or so ahead; tell me about money growth. Very muted, very low. Tell me about wage growth. Very low, certainly much below the level that we would normally think of as consistent with hitting the inflation target.Is there any spare capacity in the economy? Well, yes, we think there is; we don't know how much and it's hard to judge, both the
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010level and the speed at which that will be eroded; but clearly we think there's significant spare capacity. Where's the level of output relative to where it was before? Well below. What about inflation expectations? Well, you know actually quite consistent with the target and, if anything, below the levels that we saw during much of the period when inflation averaged 2%. None of these indicators in the medium term are actually flashing dangerously red in terms of the need for action.Of course the short run picture is that we've had these price level shocks, some of which may continue, or be repeated, some of which won't. I don't expect there'll be a further increase in VAT; certainly it would not be sensible to have that as a central view. There's no obvious reason to expect a further 25% fall in the exchange rate, we're not looking for that and it seems very unlikely, given where we are, and given that our export picture is beginning to look somewhat encouraging.So all of those things I think add up to a picture where we feel that the charts in this Report accurately reflect a reasonable view about the balance of risks. Now of course, plenty of room for disagreement, plenty of room - I say on the Committee there's a range of views, but they're relatively small compared with the uncertainties about the outcomes, or indeed the movements in the outturns in the last couple of years. But you'd expect that. I mean we want a vigorous debate on the Committee and there are somewhat different views about the balance of risks. But as I say, I don't think they add up to a major difference of view about the big picture and it's quite clear where the centre of gravity is because these charts are quite consistent with the policy decision we took last week.Governor, the growth projection seems high and the first part of the question is - how are you modelling the impact of fiscal
Mervyn King:Spencer Dale:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010austerity on growth? You'll be aware of the debate within the IMF, the World Economic Outlook, where they tried to come up with a model. And the reason this is relevant is because when you deconstruct your - I mean, your 3% and above figure is higher than the government's projection. When you deconstruct that projection of yours, you have to remove trade altogether, because you don't expect trade to be making any positive contribution over the forecast period at all, whereas the government expects trade to be contributing about a third of GDP growth. You've explained what the variables are on trade and that it's not certain. So isn't the implication that, minus trade, the whole of the heavy lifting on this 3% growth is actually being done by the UK consumer?I don't think that's quite right, I'll get Spencer to talk in a minute about the deconstruction of the forecast. There's no doubt that we think the risk to activity on the downside and consumption is a key area. So I certainly don't dispute that.I would say, however, that compared with the forecast produced by the IMF, we're only modestly above their forecast. If you take into account the risks, the difference between what we're projecting is modestly above the IMF, but only modestly above. And we don't have - as we said in the Report, it's only - we expect the most likely outturn to be only a little above the long run historical average. Now plenty of room for disagreement about where it's going to come from, but let me ask Spencer to give you a more detailed response to the deconstruction and the modelling.Thank you, I won't try and give you too detailed a response. I mean, I guess there are two points to make. In terms of fiscal policy the majority of the fiscal consolidation is coming via government spending. Some of that comes via government
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Spencer Dale:Daniel Pimlott, Financial Times:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010procurement and some of that comes via lower welfare payments. And both of those things are relatively straightforward to put through an economic model. One can work out - if government spends less, how much of that will be affected by domestic producers and how much do they typically import? One also has estimates of - if people's income goes down how much they will reduce their spending. And so those are the types of modelling assumptions you make for that.I guess the second key point I would stress is - your presumption that we do not have any contribution from net trade contributing to growth is not correct. We see a recovery in net trade in this projection. You're going to explain to me why some of our drafting isn't correct, but let me tell you what is actually in the forecast. We do see a greater rebalancing in the economy and that contributes to growth over the forecast period.Just a supplementary on that. What maybe flummoxed me was on page 42 it says - "You see over the forecast period trade moving the current account towards balance". Now I've presumed that meant that it's negative, as it is at the moment, throughout that period, and eventually it might end up net zero. But if you look at the OBR's projection - sorry to be detailed here - the OBR's projections for all these years you're talking about; trade is net contributing plus 0.9%.So both of your statements are - can be true. When something is negative and then becomes less negative that contributes to growth. So as we go from a negative position to balance, that contributes to growth. The numbers will be different to the OBR, but in exactly the way - qualitative way - as the OBR has.Is the MPC unanimous in supporting your strong endorsement of what is essentially the political decision on the scale and size of
Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010the fiscal consolidation? And secondly, do you think there's a risk that, should the economy perform less well than you expect and the consolidation do more damage, that you risk sharing the blame for that failure? I mean after all, when England last went to Australia, I think it was a whitewash.Yes, it was, and I saw some of that. But the lesson from that is to prepare properly, which is what I've been arguing for for a long time now on fiscal policy, and to be serious. I think the current England team have done both, so I have more optimism about that than perhaps you do.There are different views among the Committee on monetary policy, so I'm sure there are probably differing views on fiscal policy. But we don't sit down and discuss it because it's not the remit of the MPC.The point that I made when I was asked a straight question at the Treasury Committee, and when the Coalition Government put a question directly to me as Governor, and asked me to make a public statement, was one which I believed was a sensible view, which was - it needed a credible, medium term, fiscal plan in place. I don't think anyone on the Committee disassociates themselves from that view.I have been very careful not to say anything about the balance between spending and tax, or indeed the particular measures that should be taken for that.I would have thought a really good story would have been if a central bank governor, if you can find a country, said - no I'm not particularly bothered about the biggest peacetime fiscal deficit in our history and I don't have a view on it. That would be a story. But the story that the central bank governor does have a view and
Simon Nixon, Wall Street Journal:Mervyn King:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010thinks that a credible medium term plan is necessary seems to me, almost a statement of the obvious.And, just for the record, I've spoken far less on this than almost any other central bank governor around the world; less than Ben Bernanke, less than Jean-Claude Trichet, both of whom have given speeches in great length and regularly. I haven't spoken on this except in response to direct questions at the Treasury Committee, and when asked by the Coalition. So perhaps we'll move on to a serious question about the economy.Governor, in the Inflation Report you acknowledge that the banking system is healthier than it was, you know, has got healthier over the last year; that funding has improved, and capital ratios are improving too. But you also gave a speech two weeks ago in which you said that the current banking system we have in the UK was the worst possible imaginable. And you suggested in an ideal banking system we'd have far higher levels of capital than envisaged under Basel III and that the ideal level of leverage in a banking system should be around six times, compared to around 20 times now. I'm just wondering - when you made those comments, were you speaking in a personal capacity or was that the considered view of the Bank of England?I was speaking as Governor of the Bank of England. And we have discussed this a lot amongst ourselves and no doubt, just as with any other issue, there are different views. But let me make clear, I didn't say the optimal leverage ratio was six times. What that speech set out to do was to analyse and give an analysis of the current state. I quite deliberately did not present a blueprint. That's not for me to do and I haven't done that; that's for the Banking Commission to set out.
Simon Nixon, Wall Street Journal:Mervyn King:Simon Nixon, Wall Street Journal:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010So what I suggest we do is - I'm very happy to have a separate press conference on issues to do with banking reform when that comes out. But I see no point in prejudging that; they will make their recommendations. There are excellent members of it, and I have quite carefully not put forward any proposals for what the long run plan should be. I have merely analysed the current state.But inevitably you're going to be taking over the regulation of the of the banking system within the next couple of years, and the banking system clearly is already looking forward to try and understand where they need to be, the market's pushing them already in that direction. So, I mean clearly you're ...And I made absolutely clear in that speech. If you read the speech carefully you'll see absolutely crystal clear is that - and we've done this, we were the one country more than any other that argued in the international negotiations that it was important to distinguish between the long run steady state to which the system got and the speed at which you pushed it to move. We went out of our way to ensure that that transition period was long, so there would be no damage to lending to the real economy.We've achieved that, and I said very clearly in that speech that, as far as the Bank of England is concerned, we will not be accelerating that timetable. So if anyone is concerned in the market that we might want to move to the full Basel III requirements before 2019, let me take the opportunity today of repeating very clearly that we will not be accelerating that timetable.And imposing a UK finish on the banking rules when you become regulator of the banking system?
Mervyn King:Sean O’Grady, Independent:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010When - the debate on capital requirements for systemically important institutes is continuing, and there is a general agreement that those kinds of banks will require greater loss absorbing capacity that is agreed by every member of the Basel Committee and the G20. It was in the statement that was made. What that means in practice, the Basel Committee will be working on over the next year, and we'll see what their proposals are.Governor, we know that there are half a million jobs in the public sector that will go over the next few years and we also know I think, from estimates that reasonably respected bodies have made, that another maybe million jobs could go in the private sector as a direct result of that. So maybe 1.6 million jobs disappearing over the next few years. Are you confident that the private sector, as part of this rebalancing of the economy, will be able to generate sufficient jobs to stop unemployment soaring and to prevent what some people call a jobless recovery?Well let me rephrase it slightly and say - am I confident that it can do it? Whether it will depends on many things which are not within our control and depend in part on the world economy. Yes, I am confident that it can. And I think one needs to see this in perspective. The OBR have estimated that around, as you say, half a million jobs in the public sector could disappear over five years; the bulk of that, or the majority of it, being back end loaded rather than front end loaded. The number of new jobs created in the economy over the past year, was a quarter of a million.If the economy in these circumstances can create a quarter of a million new jobs, net new jobs, over the past year, it is clearly feasible and not at all unreasonable to imagine that over a five year period you can see a shift in employment between the public and private sector of that order of magnitude. In some ways it’s
Sean O’Grady, Independent:Mervyn King:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010reversing what we went through in the past decade of the switch from private into public. So it can be done.And in terms of the number of gross jobs, the number of people moving into a job, individuals, in the last year was 4 million. So there's massive turnover in the job market and the economy is capable of producing new jobs. The issue is not that; the issue is will the balance of demand in the economy over the next few years be such as to ensure that growth is on track to meet the, say, central view of the MPC which is - we can grow at a rate close to our long run average thus generating jobs in the private sector to absorb slowly but steadily lost jobs in the public sector. And I don’t think that's at all implausible to imagine, and quite consistent with our central view. The number of jobs created or lost can vary enormously from one period to the next.So we could well avoid having three million unemployed as a headline number?I'm not going to make any forecasts. And one of the puzzles at present which we will need to answer here is that, and it’s a genuine puzzle which section three of the Report - which I’d like to draw to your attention - which is all about how much spare capacity there is in the economy, points to the fact that you get very conflicting views depending on which piece of data you look at.At one level unemployment has gone up quite a bit less than we had expected, and that seems to imply, given the data on labour productivity which show a sharp fall, that there may well be significant labour hoarding in firms. That would suggest that there could be a recovery in output without significant additional employment growth; net, but in the economy overall switching from public to private.
Alen Mattich, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010On the other hand there are some surveys, business surveys on capacity, that suggest that - certainly in manufacturing - the chart is in the Report, that they’re reporting that there's much less spare capacity than one might think. Now I think it’s very difficult to balance these things. Clearly what we have at present is an economy that, because of the rebalancing, is behaving rather differently in different sectors, with manufacturing and trade showing less spare capacity than in the public sector, where as you say public spending will come down and there will be net job losses.The challenge for the UK - and this might be a very difficult bit - is that over five years we can achieve this rebalancing. But in order to get there we have to pass through what I called in August some rather choppy waters. That's the phrase I used in August, and it’s still true. And we will be deflected in one direction or another by various shocks as they come along. Ultimately we can make that rebalancing, and we have to to get to a sustainable position. But it won’t be an easy path for the next few years. And in the course of that there may be movements in the labour market both up and down.Some members of the MPC have been pretty explicit that they have a bias in favour of overshooting rather than undershooting the 2% target. I don’t know of anybody on the MPC who prefers to undershoot the target. Does this mean that on balance the MPC is tilted towards overshooting?No I don’t think that's a fair representation. I don’t know of any member of the MPC that has taken the view that in the medium term, looking ahead two to three years, that they want either to overshoot or undershoot the inflation target. The question about whether we accept that in the short run inflation is likely to be
Alen Mattich, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010above target and not take countervailing action now to deal with an overshoot next year, is an issue about the response to short round shocks. And I think that if we were to try to prevent inflation rising above target, or being above target during 2011, we would need to raise interest rates very significantly, creating a lot more unemployment, creating much slower growth even than the relatively modest rate we’re seeing now. And if that were to lead to a significant undershoot of the inflation target in two or three years time, I'm sure that you’d be one of the first of the people to say - but why on earth did you do that when you could see that in the medium term the risks were not all on the upside?So I think what we have to get used to is a world in which it is simply not possible for the MPC to prevent short-term movements of inflation around the target if there are big movements in either the exchange rate, indirect taxes, commodity prices, energy prices, gas/electricity prices. All of those things can in the short run mean that inflation can be either above or below our target. We have to judge whether it’s sensible to try to offset those in the short run. If we think this is going to be a continuing phenomenon then we can’t ignore it. But if we feel it’s short-lived and that inflation in two to three years time will come back to the target then it’s not obvious that we should be taking countervailing actions.But that's not really what Mr Posen and Mr Miles seem to have said which is that - if the balance of risks is for very low inflation or quite high inflation, we’d prefer the quite high inflation as ...As I say, they can speak for themselves but I'm not sure that you should interpret what they say in that way. We have a remit, given to us by Parliament and the government, that says we have to do our best to keep inflation close to the target looking ahead two to three years. And I don’t believe that any member of the
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010Committee is consciously trying to generate inflation that's different from the target, looking further ahead in the medium term.The IMF, while congratulating the UK on its deficit reduction plans, has suggested that there should be a contingency plan for if growth falls short. What beyond QE is our contingency plan? And a slightly related question: the Inflation Report acknowledges that anticipation of more QE is one of the factors driving bond yields to near record lows. Are you concerned about stimulating fresh bubbles in bond markets and central bankers?Let me take the second one, and then you can remind me about the first. On the second one, the level of long-term real interest rates is not driven by monetary policy; it’s driven by what’s happening in the balance in world capital markets between flows of saving and investment. That's a real variable. Of course when inflation is expected to be low for a long time, that will pull down nominal rates. That's just a result of meeting the inflation target at a time when real interest rates are very low.There is a risk that at some point the flows of savings and investment will change. If we get a real rebalancing in the world economy, then no doubt financial markets will wake up to the fact that in the longer term real interest rates could be higher, because the balance between savings and investment will have altered. At that point then asset prices will fall back as real interest rates move up, and that could create some risks looking further ahead; and we’re very conscious of that. But there's nothing we can do as central banks, either individually or collectively, to influence the overall balance between savings and investment, other than to lend our support and weight to those people who want to bring about an orderly rebalancing of the world economy.
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph: Mervyn King:Eric Albert, La Tribune:Mervyn King:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010On the first, this is about plan B, right?Yes, essentially it is. Is plan B more QE, or is there more to it?The one thing we are not short of in this country is plan Bs, right; there seem to be lots of them. There are certainly from our point of view on the Committee, if we were to engage in further monetary easing - and I say if - but if we were to do it, it would be in terms of further asset purchases. There are also the automatic stabilisers; there is an annual budget; there are all kinds of other things that could happen or could go on. The challenge this country faced in 2007 was not a shortage of plan Bs, it was the absence of a plan A. Now we have a plan A - that's the big picture.You’re issuing a strong warning to G20 so that they work together. In this do you include some form or shape of a new international monetary framework? France is the chair of the G20 next year; they want to include it in their talks, Nicolas Sarkozy’s thinking of the sterling devaluation of 25% as part of the reason why they want to act. Is this desirable? Is this a priority to you, and what shape should it have?Well I've given speeches over more than ten years now saying that we need to look at the international monetary system, so I'm absolutely delighted that at last France seems to have recognised that they have the ability and the courage to take this right to the heart of the international agenda next year. So I'm very pleased that this will be at the focus of the - not just G20 - but also continuing private G7 discussions. And it is very important.But what I would stress is that the big problem we face at present is not to do with reserve currencies or issues of that sort; the real issue is finding a way of dealing with the gradual unwinding of
Eric Albert, La Tribune: Mervyn King:Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010these large current account imbalances. And that cannot be done by each country acting on its own. In the end there is only one path along which these imbalances will unwind, and it is better that that be determined by joint agreement, with later discussion about the instruments for ensuring that, rather than the result of a disorderly process which could well be accompanied by a move to protectionism and falling levels of world activity. That's why it’s so important. And I very much welcome the French interest in this and their wish to put it at the heart of the G20 next year.But what kind of shape should a monetary framework take?Well that's something we shall discuss over the next year, and again I don’t want to prejudge what will come out of those discussions. And I much look forward to the ideas which the French will put on the table at the beginning of next year which we will discuss no doubt in a series of delightful places where we will meet for yet more conferences, which I am sure under the French Presidency will not seem as interminable and in as unattractive places as has sometimes been the case in the past.Governor, just to draw you on those G20 comments, do you think that when the Chinese Deputy Finance Minister says that the US Fed policy is dangerous, when the German Finance Minister says that they’re clueless, that they’re wrong? And given your experience of economic international diplomacy of the ten years, what has happened to get this stuff out in the open through the megaphone rather than through normal back channels?And can you just clarify what would be a sensible outcome of the G20 in terms of the process of something - you talk about something kind of calmer, but what would that actually look like?
Mervyn King:Simon Duke, Daily Mail:Mervyn King:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010I'm not going to comment on individual statements. I think that there have been far too many of those in the past few days, and what we need now is a recognition that we all face a common challenge. If we end up 12 months from now with countries taking protectionist measures, everyone will suffer. So I think the absolute imperative for this weekend is a clear demonstration that every member of the G20 recognises that the imbalances are a problem, that they need to unwind along of path over a period of time, but along a path where all countries can understand what that path will be and have bought into it.Now I don’t think it makes any sense to try to push people to agree numbers or particular policy commitments this weekend. We’re not in that position. But we are very much in the position where we need to demonstrate now that every country is determined to work together to a joint mutual resolution of these imbalances. If we don’t do that, then I fear that the next 12 months will be an even more difficult and dangerous period than the one we’ve been through.Just back to QE, I'm just wondering how concerned you are that the second dose of QE in the US will lead to unintended bubbles emerging in various parts of the world, and whether that will feed back into the UK in terms of higher inflation?And the second question is - is there any sense that credit is flowing more readily and more freely to small and medium sized enterprises in the UK?Okay on the first one, as far as the UK is concerned, which is our focus at the press conference, then if there are upward pressures - whether it’s on exchange rates or prices in the rest of the world - that will indeed affect us. And we need to recognise that one of the challenges we face is that if the rest of the world, particularly
Jenny Scott, Bank of England:ENDPage 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th November 2010in emerging markets, if that part is growing rapidly and if their growth is more commodity or energy intensive than that growth in the rest of the world, then that may well put upward pressure on commodity and energy prices, and that we need to take into account. That doesn’t seem at present to be in the futures prices in the market. There's a chart in the Inflation Report on commodity prices which shows that, so we’ll have to see. I don’t think it will be a central view, but it is a risk.But if those countries themselves are worried about what you call bubbles, then the response is entirely in their own hands. No one is forcing anyone to lock their exchange rate to the US dollar. If they don’t like the result of the US domestic monetary policy, they can adopt their own monetary policy. They can’t blame somebody else for it. But that's a matter for them.As far as we’re concerned I think whatever happens, whether countries allow their exchange rates to float or not, if real exchange rates move in a way that is likely to mean real exchange rates are likely to rise in that part of the emerging markets world where growth is fairly buoyant, then that is definitely something that will impact on us and we’ll have to take into account.On the small and medium sized enterprises, the Report discusses the results of the latest data we’ve had which show that, for big companies, there seems to be an easing of credit conditions, but for small and medium sized enterprises there has been no improvement in credit conditions.I’m afraid that's all we’ve got time for. Thank you all very much for coming. Thank you.