INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 12 May 2010 Opening Remarks by the GovernorWhen we met here a year ago, world trade and output appeared to be falling at unprecedented rates. Today, there are clear signs that they have begun to recover. In the United Kingdom output has expanded for two successive quarters, and surveys point to further expansion in Q2. That is no small achievement. But the financial crisis is far from over. As debt has moved from the financial to the public sector, the banking crisis has turned into a potential sovereign debt crisis. After several months of drift over the problems in Greece, last weekend produced a comprehensive package to stem the risk of contagion to other euro-area countries. That led to a positive market reaction. But the underlying problems facing the world economy remain. The window of opportunity afforded by last weekend’s decisive actions must be used to tackle excessive fiscal deficits and rebalance demand by restoring competitiveness where needed.As I said three months ago, there are major differences between the United Kingdom and the position of some of the highly indebted euro-area countries, not least in our ability to determine our own monetary policy. Nevertheless, it is imperative that our own fiscal problems are dealt with sooner rather than later.Chart 1 (GREEN CHART), on page 7 of the Report, represents the Committee's best collective judgement of the range of outcomes for four-quarter GDP growth, assuming that Bank Rate follows a path implied by market interest rates and that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £200 billion throughout the forecast period. The recovery is likely to gather pace over the next year, underpinned by the considerable stimulus stemming from the highly accommodative monetary stance, together with a projected further expansion of world demand and the past depreciation of sterling. But the pace of that recovery will be dampened by the fiscal consolidation and the need for UK banks to continue to repair their balance sheets. And private sector saving is likely to remain high in an environment of increased uncertainty. The projected outlook is very similar to that presented in the February Report but with somewhat greater downside risks in the short run, reflecting
2 recent events in financial markets and their implications for demand and output.Despite the downturn in the economy, inflation remains above 3%. That reflects the temporary effects on inflation of the restoration of the standard rate of VAT to 17 1⁄2%, the increase in oil prices over the past year and continuing pass-through from the exchange rate depreciation. Unless repeated, these factors should continue to push up on inflation only for a period. Chart 3 (RED CHART), on page 8 of the Report, shows the Committee's judgement about the path of CPI inflation under the same monetary policy assumptions. Inflation is likely to remain above target throughout 2010. The near-term outlook is higher because of further increases in the oil price and falls in sterling since February. Looking into next year, inflation is likely to fall back towards the target as the temporary effects of the factors pushing up on inflation wane. It will then probably fall below target as the substantial degree of spare capacity pushes down on prices. But the pace and extent of the fall in inflation are highly uncertain, and recent experience suggests that there are substantial risks in both directions which the Committee will monitor carefully.Recent events in Europe show that we are only part way through the financial crisis that began three years ago. Extraordinary measures have been taken to alleviate the worst of the symptoms, but the underlying problems will take longer to resolve, both at home and internationally. The role of the MPC in that process is to be the cornerstone of the United Kingdom’s commitment to price stability.