INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 10 November 2010 Opening Remarks by the GovernorIt is exactly a year since the Monetary Policy Committee last changed the stance of monetary policy – by increasing the scale of asset purchases to £200 billion. Since then, at each meeting the Committee has decided to maintain a high degree of monetary stimulus in order to balance the conflicting risks to the inflation outlook.In the past year, our economy has begun to recover and GDP growth has been above its long- run average. But whether that recovery will be sustained depends heavily on developments in the rest of the world, as domestic spending, especially by the public sector, is likely to grow more slowly looking ahead. And given the scale of the fall during the recession, the level of output is likely to remain weak.Despite weak demand, inflation remains more than a percentage point above our 2% target. There is no shortage of explanations for the current high level of inflation. The exchange rate, on average, remains around 25% below its level in mid-2007; there have been sharp gyrations in global commodity prices and sizeable changes to VAT. It is not surprising that the combined effect of all of these factors has led to movements in inflation that are larger than those experienced in the period 1992-2007. Indeed, were it not for these factors, our inflation experience might well have been closer to that in the United States, with inflation about as far below as it is currently above our target.Given the quantitative importance of the different influences buffeting the economy at present, it is hard to judge how inflation will evolve in the medium term, and there are sizeable risks in both directions. On the one hand, slack in the economy is likely to reduce inflationary pressure. Unemployment, at almost 8%, is high, and growth in money wages has been subdued at around 2%. If the weakness in wage growth were to continue, then once the temporary effects of higher import prices and VAT wane, inflation could move substantially below the 2% target. On the other hand, inflation has been above the target for much of the
2past three years. It is possible that additional import price pass-through or commodity price rises will push up further on inflation. And if the period of above-target outturns causes medium-term expectations to drift up, then the inflation outlook could be significantly higher.Bringing together this assessment of the uncertainties, Chart 3, on page 7 of the Report, shows the Committee's best collective judgement of the range of outcomes for CPI inflation. It is based on the assumption that Bank Rate follows a path implied by market interest rates and that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £200 billion throughout the forecast period. Inflation is likely to remain above the 2% target throughout 2011. Over this period, the projection is higher than in August, largely reflecting higher import prices, stemming from the recent depreciation of sterling and increases in a range of commodity prices. Further ahead, CPI inflation is projected to fall back, as the effects of higher import prices and VAT diminish, and persistent economic slack continues to restrain the growth of wages and prices.Towards the end of the forecast, the Committee judges that it is about as likely that inflation will be above the target as below it. But at both the two and three-year horizons, there is only a one-in-four chance that inflation will be within 1⁄2 percentage point of the target. That underlines the uncertainty faced by the Committee. We cannot be sure which of the big risks to the outlook will materialise. Moreover, short-run factors, which are beyond the control of monetary policy, can inject volatility into measured inflation – in either direction – moving it away from target. What it does not mean, however, is that the MPC’s resolve to keep inflation as close as possible to the 2% target is in any way diminished.Chart 1, on page 6 of the Report, shows the Committee's judgement about the range of outcomes for four-quarter GDP growth, under the same monetary policy assumptions. The outlook is similar to that presented in the August Report. The UK recovery is likely to continue, supported by both the stimulus to private demand from monetary policy and a rebalancing of the economy towards net trade, driven by the strengthening in the global economy and the lower level of sterling. Overall, growth is judged to be a little more likely to be above its historical average rate than below it for much of the forecast period. Even so, the
3large fall in output during the recession means that some spare capacity is likely to persist over the forecast period.At present, there are large upside and downside risks to inflation. Monetary policy has to balance these risks. Only with hindsight will it be clear which has predominated.	But there is, as you would expect and should want, a vigorous debate between members, and a range of views that is wider than usual, about the weight to attach to those different risks. The MPC will continue to judge the balance of risks each month. And, like the English batsmen preparing to defend the Ashes, watching carefully and perfectly balanced in the crease ready to play forward or back according to the length of the incoming delivery, so the MPC will watch the incoming data carefully, ready to adjust policy in either direction in order to keep inflation on track to meet the 2% target in the medium term.