INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 11 August 2010 Opening Remarks by the GovernorAt the time of the May Report, the financial crisis had evolved into a sovereign debt crisis in Europe. Given the subsequent fiscal announcements, and the publication of the European Bank stress tests, has that difficult time passed? Up to a point. But whereas crises occur suddenly, they fade only gradually. It will take many years before bank balance sheets and fiscal positions return to anything like normal. In the meantime they will act as headwinds to the recovery. But continuing monetary stimulus and the earlier depreciation of sterling will act as tailwinds. Looking ahead, the UK economy is facing a major rebalancing away from private and public consumption and towards net exports. Achieving that rebalancing, while confronting those headwinds, is likely to mean a choppy recovery.Indeed, short-run indicators of demand and output are already proving particularly volatile. After a weak first quarter, growth in the second quarter was estimated to be over 1%. But the pattern of growth in Q1 and Q2 was distorted by temporary factors such as the unusually cold weather in January. Over the first half of the year as a whole, growth was probably close to its long-run average. That is clearly a significant improvement upon last year, and somewhat stronger than expected in May. And the tailwinds will continue to support growth. But there are clearly risks: business and consumer sentiment have shown signs of softening, measures of financial fragility remain elevated, and there is great uncertainty about the outlook for both the United States and our most important trading partner, the euro area.Chart 1 (GREEN CHART), on page 6 of the Report, represents the Committee's best collective judgement of the range of outcomes for four-quarter GDP growth, assuming that Bank Rate follows a path implied by market interest rates and that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £200 billion throughout the forecast period. The UK recovery is likely to continue, but the overall outlook is weaker than that presented in the May Report, reflecting the softening in confidence, the persistence of tight credit conditions
2and the faster fiscal consolidation. But the downside risks around this central projection are judged to be smaller, due in large part to the fiscal measures announced in the June Budget which reduced the possibility of a sharp rise in long-term interest rates.Inflation has been volatile in recent years. On average, it has been above target and is likely to remain so until the end of next year. During the past two years inflation moved above 5%, then fell to 1.1%, rose again to 3.7%, and is now falling back once more. It is not difficult to identify the factors that have contributed to those movements in inflation – changes to VAT, volatility in energy prices, the 25% exchange rate depreciation, and the sharp movements in the real economy. What is much more difficult is to judge the quantitative contribution of each of these factors to the movements in inflation. Certainly, the impact of these price-level shocks is greater than the Committee expected a year ago.The Committee’s central view remains that, once the effects of the price-level shocks – including the forthcoming increase in VAT – drop out of the twelve-month comparison, inflation will fall back, probably to below the target, reflecting the influence of spare capacity in the economy. Slack in the labour market – where there are around a million more people out of work than in the period prior to the crisis – already seems to have been pushing down on pay. Moreover, broad money and credit growth have remained anaemic, signalling weak inflationary pressures in the medium term. But the MPC is very conscious that there are significant risks to that view – notably, the possibility that the continuing experience of high inflation over the next year, coming after several years during which inflation has been above the target for much of the time, might cause inflation expectations to rise. If that were to occur, it would be costly to bring inflation down again.Chart 3 (RED CHART), on page 7 of the Report, shows the Committee's judgement about the path of CPI inflation, under the same monetary policy assumptions. Following the announcement in the Budget of a further increase in VAT, inflation is now expected to remain above the 2% target until the end of 2011 – significantly longer than projected in May. The overall outlook for inflation further out in the forecast is little changed from May. As the temporary effects adding to inflation drop out of the twelve-month comparison, downward
3pressure from the persistent margin of spare capacity is likely to pull inflation below the target for a period. There are significant risks in both directions, though these are judged to be weighted to the upside.During the NICE decade, we became used to inflation remaining exceptionally close to target. In contrast, over the past three years inflation has been volatile and above the target for much of the time. That does not mean that the MPC has taken its eye off the inflation ball, nor has gone soft on inflation. We have not. Rather, it is the consequence of a series of large price-level shocks. With a rebalancing of the economy to come, price-level shocks are likely to continue to affect measured inflation. Monetary policy can do little about short-run movements in inflation and must reflect a judgement about the balance of risks to inflation in the medium term. Short-run volatility is making that balancing act more difficult. But in whichever direction monetary policy moves over the next few months, it will reflect the MPC’s judgement about the actions necessary to meet the inflation target in the medium term.