Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 12th May 2010
Jenny: Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010Please say your name and who you work for first; thanks.I assume that the projections - well, first of all can you tell us what the big picture of these projections are; whether they're similar to last month, because sometimes it's hard to tell. But I assume that these projections, in terms of fiscal policy, reflect the previous government's fiscal policy. Can you give us a sense of how the projections would change were fiscal policy to be tightened further as the current government, the new government, proposes to do?Well, I think the big picture in the projections is very similar to February, and it's one in which we do see the pace of recovery continuing and moving up through this year, but with some very significant downside risks.On inflation, the short run picture for inflation is slightly higher than in February, but again in the medium term we expect inflation to come down below the target, given the extent of spare capacity in the economy.But there are enormous uncertainties around this, and the Committee will want to monitor very carefully, month by month, what is happening to inflation.I think that big picture is similar to February, and I think that's the big picture that's going to hold for the future.This Report went to press on Monday, and so is not based on decisions which have been announced by the new government as part of the agreement. I can't really judge how much the forecast would change; I don't think the big picture would change very much. I think it would diminish some of the downside risks because of the action that will be taken to deal with the deficit.
Joel Hills, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010But that is something which I can't personally judge. I think the Committee will have to review this in a month's time. And it will then look at not only the changes that have occurred over the last 24 hours, but also all the other data and information that come in, like the labour market data this morning; the inflation data we'll see over the next month. And, as ever, all of the information that comes in in a month will go into the update, and you'll see in August, in our next Report, how that's affected our judgement.Governor, we have a new government, and austerity measures are on the way in terms of tax rises. Is it your view that the severity of those tax rises will mean that the Liberal Democrats and the Conservative Party won't be re-elected come the next General Election?No, that is not my view, and I don't think you should - I think you should take alleged reports with a big pinch of salt of what I was supposed to have said in a private conversation over two months ago.The most important thing now is for the new government to deal with the challenge of the fiscal deficit. It is the single most pressing problem facing the United Kingdom; it will take a full parliament to deal with, and it is very important that measures are taken straight away to demonstrate the seriousness and the credibility of the commitment to dealing with that deficit.And I have been told what is in the agreement between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats this morning, and I am very pleased that there is a very clear and binding commitment to accelerate the reduction in the deficit over the lifetime of the parliament, and to introduce additional measures this fiscal year to demonstrate the importance of getting to grips with that before
Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010running the risk of an adverse market reaction. I think we've seen in the last two weeks, particularly, but in the case of Greece, over the last three months, that it doesn't make sense to run the risk of an adverse market reaction, but to get ahead of that and to demonstrate - markets have been waiting for the UK Election; that is now over. They would expect a new government to take decisive action. And the agreement that I've been informed about, that was reached between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats is a very strong and powerful agreement to reduce that deficit and to take more action than was embodied in the Budget in the spring.Really to follow on from what you were just saying about Greece, I'm curious as to what you feel the potential knock-on risks for the UK could be. I mean, are you mainly worried about contagion inasmuch as it affects the financial sector over here, or are you worried about the different scrutiny that the investors will pay to the UK's fiscal position, given what we know about it?I think the lesson from Greece is that, if the problem had been dealt with three months ago, it would not have become as serious as it subsequently became. And I think the important thing now is that Greece has been dealt with a major IMF and European Union package. I think the crucial thing is to prevent contagion from Greece to other Euro Area countries in particular, and that was the purpose of the package at the weekend - to prevent the immediate market contagion which at the end of last week had threatened to be very serious.But those measures provide only a window of opportunity. They do not affect the total amount of debt, in themselves which countries around the world have to repay. The markets, which some of our European partners like to describe as speculators causing difficulty, are the very same markets where the public
Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010sector is looking to provide trillions of pounds of support to finance public debt around the major countries in the world over the next few years.What matters is that those investors are prepared to buy government debt at interest rates which make it tolerable for the countries concerned. And that is why it is important for each and every country to demonstrate that they are on top of a programme for their country to reduce the fiscal deficit to a sustainable path. That has been the big message, but within the international community I think there is a very clear understanding that the package of financial support which was made available at the weekend is not an underlying solution to the problem. It provides a window of opportunity which gives governments the chance to put their house in order; and it gives the international economic community a chance to talk about what I think - and have always said for some considerable time - to be one of the major issues facing us, which is the need to rebalance demand around the world economy.There will be some countries inevitably that will be called upon to make very substantial fiscal consolidation. That fiscal consolidation over a period will be dampening domestic demand. There needs to be in other parts of the world economy a clear recognition of the need to expand domestic demand there, in order that we don't end up in a downturn in the world economy.This is something which is clearly at the heart of the IMF discussions with the G20, and we'll come back in Korea in June, and again with the heads of government in Canada, and later again in Korea in October and November.But these are absolutely fundamental questions. They can't be dodged, and the sort of measures to provide financial support,
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010that we saw put in place at the weekend, are not a solution. They are a necessary part of the approach; they provide a window of opportunity that governments have to take advantage of.Just to confirm, on the basis of what you said in your first two answers - you suggested that the agreement that you're now familiar with between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats on fiscal policy would diminish the downside risks to the economy this year. Could you just confirm - you think that the Bank's forecast for growth this year - or the chances of growth in the UK - have gone up as result of this deal, if it's implemented?I'm not saying the central path has gone up. I said some of the downside risks that might have been there because of the possibility of an adverse market reaction, which would have increased the cost of funding government debt and pushed up the yield curve, which I think would have affected demand and output - some of those risks will be diminished by evidence of a decisive and determined approach to deal with the fiscal deficit.Now I think the central path is unlikely to be affected very much, but the crucial thing is that I think these measures reduce one of the downside risks that could have occurred. We talk in the Report about the need to take fiscal action to avoid unnecessary increases in the cost of funding public debt.Yes, but the implication of what you're saying - you certainly don't think there would be any change in a downward direction to growth forecasts, i.e. you don't agree with those who worried about the growth implications of this additional fiscal tightening?I think they will be swamped by news that we will get about movements in domestic demand in the economy. We've seen very strong figures yesterday for industrial production. We have
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010no idea whether they will be carried through, but I think what we have to be conscious of is there is enormous uncertainty in the short run, but in our judgment - and I think the document that you will see, when it's published, about the agreement requests the Bank's advice of whether these fiscal measures this year are desirable. And I will be very clear about that - I think they are desirable to remove the risk that an adverse market reaction - to which we would then have to respond - might itself be damaging to the outlook for the economy.Now I hope that the central view in this Report will come true, which is that the pace of recovery will pick up. But if we've learnt anything in the last three years is that events are clearly very uncertain, and we will have to see. And that's why the Monetary Policy Committee, in charge of monetary policy, has always the flexibility to move in either direction, to tighten or ease monetary policy in response to events that occur.To follow on that - in the report you suggest that uncertainties about the fiscal path might be a risk for raising popular inflation expectations. I mean, again, would you say that this deal reduces that risk of overall increase in inflation expectations and gives the Bank more room for manoeuvre in the future?Well, I hope it does, and I think time will tell. But I hope it does. But let's be clear: this is an issue not just for the United Kingdom. Every country around the world is in a similar position, even the United States; the world's largest economy has a very large fiscal deficit. And one of the concerns in financial markets is clearly - how will this enormous stock of public debt be reduced over the next few years? And it's very important that governments, both here and elsewhere, get to grips with this problem, have a clear approach and a very clear and credible approach to reducing the size of those deficits over, in our case, the lifetime of this
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010parliament, in order to convince markets that they should be willing to continue to finance the very large sums of money that will be needed to be raised from financial markets over the next few years, at reasonable interest rates.Governor, in the Report you make some provisional conclusions about the impact of quantitative easing. You say it's probably knocked one percentage point of the gilt yield; clearly in the growth projection it's having an upward pressure on - three and a bit percent growth over the forecast period is high. And yet, in the introduction, you say - despite the £200 billion - the inflation expectations are below target for much of the period.So there are two questions that come out of this. One, should we imply from that that more QE is possible, and two, have you begun to model what the impact of exit from QE is? Since you know what the impact of entry now is better, have you modelled the exit?Well, I think you should certainly conclude that the Committee has not ruled out any further asset purchases. I think it would be quite wrong to do that. We have not decided that we want to do it, but it is an instrument in our armoury and it will remain so. So it certainly has not been ruled out.I'll ask perhaps Spencer to comment in a minute on the work we've done on trying to calibrate the impact of the asset purchase scheme so far. Inevitably it's very uncertain, and I'm personally always rather sceptical about putting precise numbers on this. But I think our view would be that this would simply be reversing the sort of scale of impact that we've had. We regard this quantitative easing we've engaged in so far as injecting £200 billion worth of broad money into the economy. That then feeds through the economy in a variety of ways, affecting yields and
Spencer Dale:Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010decisions by holders of assets to diversify into other instruments, and affecting the cost of finance which those instruments represent.And if we were to tighten policy, which at some point undoubtedly we will have to do, we can either raise Bank Rate, which will have an immediate effect on the very short-term structure of interest rates, or we can sell assets which will start to impact further down the yield curve. And the Committee at the time will make a judgement as to the balance between those two.At some point I would very much hope to get back to a world in which we will be, as we were before the financial crisis, operating primarily on Bank Rate, with it in normal levels, not creating any financial distortions, and where the Committee will have one instrument - Bank Rate - where it will be able to vote as a Committee month by month on the right level.But perhaps Spencer can make a comment on the work we've done so far on calibrating the impact of our asset purchases?Certainly. So as you see there's a box on page 12 of the Report which summarises some of that work. And the work summarised there suggests that our analysis of gilt yields, looking at the period immediately around policy announcements, suggests that gilt yields are around about 100 basis points lower, we think, as a result of asset purchases.Now clearly that's just the first leg in the transmission from these asset purchases into the rest of the economy. I think one can point to a number of other bits of evidence which are consistent with QE working through the economy. Bond yields and bond spreads have declined very substantially; equity prices are up over 50% since we started our asset purchases; there's been
Larry Elliott, Guardian:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010record levels of bond and equity issues by companies last year; and we're also starting to see a pick-up in nominal demand - nominal demand in the second half of last year grew at around close to its average rate.Now I don't think we can say all of those factors are caused entirely by quantitative easing, but I'm very certain in my own mind that they contributed to that. And so I think it's sort of so far so good, if the quantitative easing appears to be working through the economy like we expect, and now I think we expect it to continue to work through over the coming quarters.Two questions if I can, please, Governor. One's about the domestic economy and one's about the global situation.If you look at the Bank's forecast for growth and inflation over the last few years, you've tended to be a bit too optimistic about growth and a bit too optimistic about inflation also. So I just wondered whether there was any concern on the MPC that there's been some sort of permanent deterioration in the trade-off between growth and inflation or whether you just put this down to a series of one-off factors?And on the global situation, I just wonder whether you see any sign whatsoever that people are prepared to grasp the underlying problem of solving the imbalances that you've identified? Because otherwise countries that take these very difficult fiscal decisions are going to have no way of growing their economies and we're going to have a much lower level of overall aggregate global demand, and therefore potential for another deep recession. And in the context of Europe, that obviously means Germany. I just wonder whether you see in any of your discussions any evidence that people are prepared to tackle the
Mervyn King:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010real cause of this crisis rather than just the symptoms of it, as and when the crises blow up?Let me start with the first - and I might bring Charlie in on the first - before I turn to the second.I think it's very hard to say. I think the scale of events and shocks to both our and the world economy in the last three years have been sufficiently dramatic that it's quite hard to think about the last three years as anything other than some very one-off events. I don't think I would infer now that what we've seen has been a permanent change in various trade-offs at all. I think we've seen a sequence of events.But I do think there are - that doesn't make it easy to forecast the future, because what we have seen in recent years is clearly tremendous sensitivity oil and commodity prices to changes in the level and composition of world demand. That we've seen has had very significant effects on UK inflation. I mean, the volatility in UK inflation in the past three years, compared with the previous 15, can be directly linked to movements in world oil and commodity prices.So there are these factors which have affected it. But I don't think we can afford to be complacent about any of this, and we're not. I think we will be monitoring very carefully how these shocks will pan out. We don't know - and the Report goes to some lengths to try to explain why it's extremely difficult to judge the amount of spare capacity in the economy. We think there is a lot of spare capacity, but to know how much is almost impossible. And I think we just have to look at all the data and the symptoms in order to form judgements as we go through.
Charlie Bean:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010But perhaps let me ask Charlie to comment on that, and then I'll come back to your second question.Yes, I think first of all it's worth saying - as regards the projections of growth - output has been coming in roughly in line with the central forecasts for about the last two or three Inflation Reports. It's really on the inflation side where it's tended to be noticeably higher than we expected.A key driver there has been what's been happening in the world, particularly commodity prices. So that, for instance, if you compare the latest projections with our projections in February, the oil price is 10% higher roughly. And a good part of the increase in the profile of inflation over the next year is down to that, coupled with a bit from the 2% depreciation.But having said all that, I think it is fair to say that we've been surprised to the upside at how resilient inflation has been. Some of that may be down to the pass-through from the depreciation of sterling being somewhat faster or somewhat greater than we were expecting; but some of it may also be down to a changed behaviour in pricing by firms. In particular, one possibility is that companies that in a normal downturn might be inclined to shave their prices to try and maintain or build market share, if they find themselves restricted in access to credit, might be more concerned about protecting their cash flow, and be rather less willing to cut their prices. So that's one story.We have spent time considering to what extent the downturn has impaired the supply capacity of the economy because a lack of working capital may have reduced the scope for some businesses to supply demand. That also would tend to raise prices. So there's a number of possibilities out there.
Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010As the Governor said, at this stage we don't think there's been a permanent deterioration, but this is clearly something we will learn more about as we go on through the next year or two.On the second, as you know international conversations proceed very slowly - too slowly usually. In 2008 there was an exception. I think the mood and manner of the G7 meetings at the IMF in October 2008 was very different, and that people did come together and recognise that, unless they worked together, we would all be facing an extraordinarily serious position. That's pretty well documented in Hank Paulson's memoirs of the period.But I think what I heard on the telephone conversations that I was part of at the weekend, it was slightly reminiscent of that: a recognition that the problems are far too serious for countries not to work together. After all, dealing with a banking crisis was difficult enough, but at least there were public sector balance sheets onto which the problems could be moved.Once you move into the sphere of concerns about sovereign debt, there is no answer; there's no backstop. And it is very important therefore that we hit these problems on the head now, put in place credible solutions to prevent the problems becoming worse. And I detected at the weekend, in the conversations that I spent hours listening to on the telephone, that this sense of the need to work together was there again. Now that's not the same as coming up with measures - individual countries have to produce fiscal measures. Spain has announced this morning some further fiscal measures. I think you will see in the next few weeks determined action by governments to try to deal with this problem.I think at the weekend the Americans, and indeed the IMF, played a very constructive role in bringing countries together to put in
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010place the measures that were necessary. But it's a much harder set of issues now. It's to do with individual fiscal consolidation, and it's also to do, as you said, with the need to try to work together through the IMF and G20 in our process that's been the framework that's been agreed in principle, to ensure that countries that do have the ability to expand domestic demand are encouraged to do so, to enable those countries that need to regain competitiveness to have the opportunity to increase their exports to those countries that previously had large current account surpluses, so that we can rebalance demand in the world economy to avoid the very problem that you referred to at the end of your question - namely, a sharp slowdown in the world economy.And that will be I think the big question for the international agenda over the rest of this year.Can I just clarify - did you advise or were you consulted upon on the European Central Bank's purchases of government bonds? Did the Bank of England offer its advice?And secondly, can I clarify very specifically what it is the Bank is giving the thumbs up to in regard to the joint policy agreement? Is it in-year cuts or tax rises that could begin in a matter of weeks or months?Let me take the first. We have many conversations on a regular basis with our colleagues in the European Central Bank. But we don't offer advice; we exchange thoughts and experiences and views. But certainly we do not offer advice, they reach their own judgements, and that was true at the weekend. I think it was very important at the weekend that the finance ministers in Europe recognised that they had a responsibility, not just to put in place a package of financial support, but also to recognise that countries
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010in the Euro Area, certain countries in particular, had to take action to deal with their fiscal position. And that was something that the European Central Bank was very clear on.On the second, I have been told about the agreement reached between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats. It includes an accelerated programme to reduce the fiscal deficit over the lifetime of this Parliament, and it introduces £6 billion of cuts this financial year, and the advice of the Bank has been requested as to the feasibility and advisability of these measures.The Treasury can advise on the feasibility; our advice on the advisability is that it is sensible to take measures in this fiscal year to demonstrate the genuine commitment and determination of the new government, which has a very clear and stable structure to this agreement that I've been informed about. And it's very important that we convince financial markets that this is definitely going to happen. It's not going to be easy, it's going to be a painful few years in dealing with these adjustments, but we have faced the biggest financial crisis that the world has seen. It has caused problems for the public sector in every country in the world, but it's caused problems here. We have a very large fiscal deficit and we have to demonstrate that we are capable - as I'm quite convinced we are, and will be - of dealing with this problem.As I said, markets have waited for the election to be over. They will now look for a very clear and strong signal, and I believe that the document that was agreed, and that I've been informed about, does constitute that strong signal.Just to clarify you were a little more cautious about timing in previous Inflation Reports; is it the extent of the economic recovery that's clarified your thoughts on ...?
Mervyn King:David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010... I think we've seen several things. We see the recovery beginning to take place, and we expect that the pace of that recovery will pick up. But we've also seen the market response in the past two weeks, where major investors around the world are asking themselves questions about the interest rate at which they are prepared to finance trillions of pounds of money that will need to be raised on financial markets in the next two to three years, to finance government requirements around the world. And that I think has been a sobering reflection of what can happen if you don't make very clear at the outset - I think markets were not expecting any action before the election. After the election they need and they want a very clear, strong signal and evidence of the determination to make it work.And I think that it's quite difficult to make credible a commitment to fiscal consolidation if all the measures are somehow in the future. You need to start and get on with it.Governor, you took a question just now on inflation. By the end of this year we'll have been mostly above the inflation target for five years and as you say in the Inflation Report, it's uncertain - the path of inflation is uncertain; it may be that it doesn't moderate as quickly as you set out. I just wondered how constrained the MPC feels about responding to that, given the extent of fiscal tightening in prospect, given the fragility of the financial system. You've talked about tough fiscal decisions. Is there going to come a moment where we have to have a tough and unwelcome monetary policy decision as well?Well if you mean a tightening of monetary policy, then at some point it certainly will come. And when it comes it will be very welcome because it will be a sign of the strength of the UK economy, and the fact that we feel we will need to tighten monetary policy because we think the prospect for inflation is that
Sam Fleming, Daily Mail:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010it will not be to fall below the target as a result of so much spare capacity. So I think we would look forward to that time when it will come, because it will be a reflection of strength of the economy. We're not at that point now; I don't know when it will come; that's something we will judge month by month.I can assure you the MPC is very concerned about what's been happening to inflation. I do think that we have seen a sequence of shocks, price level shocks, which have inevitably raised inflation. We have also seen in the past three years two episodes now in which inflation did go up quite significantly and then came down quite sharply. And I think our judgement is that next year we will see a repeat of that. If these effects are not repeated, if we don't see further increases in indirect taxes, or oil prices, then those shocks will not be there and inflation will start to come back and reflect the extent of spare capacity.But there is great uncertainty about that, and the Committee will judge it month by month. We really do not know precisely how much spare capacity there is in the economy, nor do we know precisely what the impact of that spare capacity is on inflation.But I think if you look at inflation expectations, which we think are still well anchored, I think if you look at the experience of the past three years where inflation did go up, yes, but it then did come down, I think the judgements in our Inflation Report seem to us reasonable; and that the good central view would be that - despite the recent experience - it would be the right central view to expect that inflation would come back to, and then below target. But there is absolutely not certainty about that and we will be monitoring that extraordinarily carefully.Two questions if I could. Firstly on inter-bank funding costs, the Report refers to the fact that the Eurozone crisis has seen an
Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010increase in inter-bank funding costs again. Given the withdrawal of official support from the banking sector, guarantees and so on, and also the large amount of debt that banks have to roll over, should firms and households be concerned that we'll again start to see upward pressure on interest rates and a lack of credit in the economy?The second was on the future of financial regulation. What sort of clarity do you now have on the future shape of financial regulation in the UK, and are you pleased that we will apparently still have a separate bank supervisor, rather than that being folded into the Bank of England?Let me ask in a minute Paul Fisher to comment on the first, and let me then take the second. I had a conversation this morning with the new Chancellor. We discussed the agreement and we discussed the fiscal deficit. We did not discuss financial regulation. I think dealing with the fiscal deficit is the number one issue. There will be time to talk through - the agreement does suggest that the Bank of England will be asked to be responsible for macro-prudential regulation, and it will have an oversight role in micro-prudential regulation.Now right through this I've always said that what concerns me most is what the nature of regulation is, not who does it. And I can reiterate that today. We've never made any pitch for any particular responsibility. What we are concerned about is the nature of it. And there will now be an opportunity for careful thought and discussion with the government, and that will take place and in due course announcements will be made about precisely what these arrangements entail. There's no need to rush into that; it's right and sensible that we debate them carefully and think the issues through.
Paul Fisher:Martin Posner, Credit Management Magazine:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010Just to start off with, the situation is different now from what it was in the autumn of '08 in funding markets generally. First and foremost the central banks involved - ECB, ourselves, the Fed - are still injecting very large amounts of cash into the system relative to normal times. So there is no shortage of liquidity in domestic currency.Where we have seen the pressures, therefore, tends to be around dollar funding, particularly by non-dollar institutions in Europe. And so you see it particularly in dollar LIBORs having moved up and particularly forward rates, around three months and out. And you see it most clearly reflected in FX swap rates and the premium for getting dollars for sort of three months to a year out. And that was one of the reasons why the central banks collectively have reintroduced the dollar swap lines, to give people the backstop of dollar liquidity if they can't get it into the market.But it's not - I wouldn't want to underplay it - there have been some tense times in these funding markets, but it's not like autumn '08, and the measures have been put in place which should help to address that.Longer term funding of course remains an issue for the banking systems everywhere, and banks do have to get their houses in order and get their funding programmes going to ensure they have the medium term funding they require. And that is one of the risks we talk about in the Inflation Report - the difficulties of the banking sector in making sure it has appropriate capital and funding over the next few years.[No microphone] Governor, with the loan count, exports have gone up but companies are still have difficulties in gaining export
Mervyn King:Alen Mattich, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Alen Mattich, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010trade credit. This also relates to importers. Under the new administration will you be having discussions, or your Committee, to try and ease the reduction of credit that's available for exporters and importers on short term; I'm talking about under 90 days?Well I don't want to comment on individual specific policy proposals; that has to be for the government. But I know that the new government will want to think carefully about the supply of credit to the economy, of which the example you gave is one. And that will be a question that I'm sure will be thought of pretty seriously and there will be discussion about what measures, if any, would be appropriate to deal with that.You mentioned the possibility of having to respond to an adverse market reaction if the markets started doubting the credibility of the government to reduce its fiscal position. What form would that response be? Would that be monetising the debt?No, and I'm not going to anticipate a reaction which I do not think will happen. I think the announcements that I've been informed of will indeed be evidence of a clear and strong determination to deal with the fiscal deficit, and I think markets will see that.And could I have a second quick question? You mentioned the risks of governments losing credibility. John Taylor this morning wrote about central banks losing credibility. How long do you think you can maintain inflation above target before you start losing credibility?Well, I've always said that the point of credibility is not to do with a numerical comparison between the outturn and the target, though in the very long run that clearly is the most important thing. But in the short run the question is - do people believe that the reason
William Keegan, The Observer:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010inflation has deviated from target is because of unexpected shocks, that it was not easy to anticipate, and to which the Central Bank is responding appropriately in the medium term?Now our judgement is that to raise interest rates significantly now to deal with what we think is a short-term overshoot of inflation above the target, given the medium term prospect that spare capacity will bring inflation back to and possibly below target, would not be an appropriate response. And I think if people share that judgement, and feel that that's a sensible judgement, then we don't lose credibility. I think if people feel that our views of the outlook are wildly inaccurate and inappropriate, and that the way we've responded is not very sensible, then of course we'll lose credibility. But I think it's what economists call the reaction function, and the judgements and decisions that determine credibility; not a simple comparison over a short period between the outturn for inflation and the target.Mr Governor, I wonder whether you could clarify something for us. You've advocated tougher fiscal action and approved of what the new government is proposing, but you also said there was a danger that if there wasn't a rebalancing in the world economy, there would be another downturn. Isn't this taking quite a risk?No, I don't think so. I think the bigger risk at present, given the experience of the last two weeks, would be for a new government not to put in place clear and credible measures to deal with the fiscal deficit; that would be a risk. What matters I think at the world level - and this is something to which I think we can contribute, but not ourselves determine - at the world level it is very important for the major economies to get together and recognise that there needs to be a rebalancing of domestic demand between countries, of which fiscal consolidation is part of that. And indeed the need for fiscal consolidation is a reflection of
Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010the problems that occurred through the financial crisis and the imbalances that generated it; and that together we have to find a way of ensuring that the world economy as a whole grows at an adequate rate.I don't think that is something which any one economy on its own can achieve. And the responsibility of the UK Government is to demonstrate very clearly that it's determined to get on top of the fiscal deficit that we face. I very much hope that in conjunction with other countries and our partners, particularly in the G20, there will be a recognition around the world of the need to expand domestic demand in those countries best placed to do it, in order to ensure that those countries that need to rebalance their own domestic demand, to reduce domestic demand and have greater reliance on net exports, to be able to do that.That's why it is very important to the United Kingdom that these problems in Europe are dealt with, because we rely on a prosperous European economy in order for us to be able to rebalance our own economy; because we need to export more to Europe. And we will need to see a slowing of domestic demand and an expansion of net exports. That's the rebalancing of the UK economy requires in the next few years. That is not something that we can guarantee ourselves; we need to have a prosperous world economy - and in particular a prosperous European economy - for us to be able to do it.That's why both within the Euro Area and more generally in the world as a whole, these broader problems need to be confronted, and I hope resolved. But for the moment the most important thing for the UK government to do is to make very clear that there will be a decisive, credible programme to reduce this deficit significantly over the course of the current parliament.
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010On this question of rebalancing both globally and domestically; on the global front, the implication of the deal reached by the Europeans on Sunday night was that all the countries in the Eurozone would announce fresh measures of consolidation in one form or another, including, for example, we’ve seen Germany delay tax cuts that they were hoping to see. Just to confirm, do you think that is consistent or inconsistent with this kind of effort to rebalance, given that Germany for example does not have what you might call an unsustainable fiscal situation?I do not want to comment on a particular measure by a particular country, but I do want to suggest that within the Euro Area it’s become very clear that there is a need for a fiscal union to make the Monetary Union work. But if that is to happen there needs to be also a mechanism to enable other countries that have lost competitiveness to regain competitiveness. That requires actions, probably structural reforms, changes in wages and prices, in the countries that need to regain competitiveness. But it also needs a solid and expansionary state of domestic demand in the stronger economies in Europe.How that is to be achieved is not for me to suggest, but without more expansion of domestic demand in those economies that are well placed, there will undoubtedly be challenges.Sorry just to follow up on the domestic piece of it, you've obviously said that you think fiscal consolidation is the greatest single contribution that the government could make to a more balanced picture for UK growth. We want to have growth driven more by exports, more by investment, and the Report shows that both of those are quite uncertain at the moment. Is there other than fiscal consolidation? Do you see other areas where the government could make a decisive difference to the prospects for
Mervyn King:Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010that kind of balanced growth, or do you think really this is just a question of what happens to the global economy?Well I don’t want to comment on a wider range of government policies; that's not the role of the Bank of England. I do think that the United Kingdom as a whole can play a positive role in the international discussions and debates; I think we have.And indeed perhaps I could take the opportunity of thanking Alistair Darling, and saying that I think that - for someone who became Chancellor and after only a few weeks the world’s greatest financial crisis took place - he has brought, not just domestically but internationally, a sense of calm and good humour which has made it much easier to deal with the problems that arose. And indeed, I think we had some rocky times, but we ended up with a very strong working relationship and in large part that's because of the way he handled himself in the job.I’d like to think that the United Kingdom would carry on playing a positive role in the discussions at international level. We have so far and I think we can carry on doing that. And I think that we saw in the telephone conversations at the weekend, we saw in the meetings we’ve had at the IMF, that the UK has played and I am sure will continue to play an important role in clarifying the questions that the world economy as a whole needs to confront.I wanted to ask you for your assessment of the resilience of the UK banking sector to shocks in light of the recent market volatility. You mentioned in your report that there were some strains in wholesale funding costs, and then certainly before the weekend credit default swaps on UK banks spiked right up.Did you get a sense when you were on the phone calls over the weekend that there is a sense in which nothing much has
Mervyn King:Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010changed as far as the way the markets react to the prospect of shocks and the prospect of credit strains in the economy, or did you have more of a sense that things had improved in the way that the UK banks can deal with these issues?No I think there clearly has been a change and I think that markets have been focusing very much more on exposures of banks and banking systems to sovereign debt of the peripheral Euro Area countries. That's not a major issue for the United Kingdom banking sector.So I think that there is, you know, a concern that some banking systems perhaps might be more exposed than others. But far and away the most important thing here is just that, if these concerns about sovereign debt were to spread to a wider range of countries - and I hope the measures taken at the weekend and the measures that will now be taken will stop that and prevent that - but if they were to spread, then banking systems everywhere in the world would once again be exposed to concerns about potential losses on their holdings of sovereign debt.And that is why it is absolutely vital, absolutely vital, for governments to get on top of this problem. We cannot afford to allow concerns about sovereign debt to spread into a wider crisis dealing with sovereign debt. Dealing with a banking crisis was bad enough. This would be worse.If I could just ask a quick follow up question to that. It’s about your assessment of the priority of dealing with banking reform. And given that there is still some fragility in markets assessments of UK banks and of banks around the world for that matter, do you find it troubling that there is a bit of a re-emergence of some of the products that had been quite popular during the bull market and before the financial crisis started?
Mervyn King:Patrick Hosking, The Times:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010So in other words you’re seeing the reopening perhaps of the market for high yield collateralised loan obligations. And you’re seeing also, you know, rise in leverage for loans for leverage buyout deals. Is there a sense that you've got now that the City hasn’t learned and that some of these products that are coming back just show that it is really much more urgent than perhaps you've even just suggested now, that there be a separation between investment banking and retail banking?Well, it isn’t so much the recent developments as the fundamental reasons which led to the crisis that makes me feel it is important to take time to think through serious banking reform. I have not deviated ever in that view. I made that view, indeed I very much welcome the agreement that I've been told about to set up a commission to investigate banking reform under the new government. And I think it’s very important we take our time to think through these issues, take people through the issues, and actually come out with a judgement finally about the structure of the banking sector that we want to have.I don’t think there are simple answers here, but there are major problems which it would be quite wrong to sweep under the carpet and pretend that we have the answers already; we don’t.So banking reform is something which I hope will be very much on the agenda as a subject of debate and discussion. And then we’ll see whether a consensus emerges about where we should go.Governor you revealed this morning that you were consulted on the advisability of this immediate fiscal tightening and that you've given it your blessing. Is this the beginning of a new role for the Bank of England where it actually takes part in some of the
Mervyn King:Patrick Hosking, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010decision making on fiscal policy and certainly makes public statements approving or not moves in fiscal policy?No it’s not. The position is wholly unchanged. Central banks around the world never comment on individual fiscal measures. They do comment on the overall fiscal position and the need for action to deal with it. My colleagues Ben Bernanke and Jean-Claude Trichet have given long speeches and many interventions in the debate about the need to reduce the fiscal deficit. And I think it’s appropriate that the Central Bank comment on when the fiscal deficit reaches what of course is a record peace time deficit, the need to deal with it does actually constitute an issue relevant to monetary policy.But this is not therefore a break with the past, and it certainly does not presage I can assure you a regular commentary of the Central Bank on the overall fiscal position, on individual measures or on wider government policies. Our role will be the role which government gives us, and they have given us the role to set monetary policy. There looks to be a possible role in macro-prudential policy and possible oversight of micro-prudential supervision. That we will see as the details emerge.But it’s for the government to decide the role of the Bank of England, and in implementing that role, we will speak with an independent voice, but we will speak only within our remit.But haven’t you set a bit of precedent this morning by publicly approving this 6 billion tightening then?No, we were asked publicly by the government to say what our view on it was, and I think it’s rather different when the government asks for advice on this, to give that advice, rather
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Chris Giles, Financial Times: Mervyn King:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010than offer it unilaterally. But I do think at present this is a very unusual situation. We have a record peacetime fiscal deficit. We are still halfway through the world’s worst financial crisis ever. And it is important for the Central Bank to comment on the importance of measures to deal with the fiscal deficit that will certainly colour monetary policy for a long time to come. That's all we’re doing. We’re certainly not commenting on the merits or demerits of individual measures. That is for the government to decide.Just to follow up on Patrick’s question, and then one question myself. Just to be clear on whether this is new or not, you wouldn’t have made the same statements about the immediate tightening of fiscal policy had the government not changed. That is right because the other side wouldn’t have asked the question and so you wouldn’t have said something.I made clear in answers to the Treasury Committee last year that I thought a more ambitious programme of fiscal consolidation over the lifetime of the parliament was desirable.But not on the first year.I made - the comment on the first year was to do with the state of the economy. I think matters have moved on in the last two to three weeks, and the situation has changed. But I did make clear my overall concern about the fiscal position. I think it’s - you know clearly what my view on that was. I tried to do that by intervening as little as possible. I did not give long speeches on the subject; I made short answers in response primarily to questions at the Treasury Committee. But we have been asked this morning for the Bank to give its view on the desirability of taking some measures this year. And my view on that is clear, and I've given that now today.
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010And I suppose from your answers today, the serious worry for the UK economy has to be that we might - might be in a sort of damned if we do, damned if we don’t. Had we not taken action on the fiscal policy, we might get an adverse market reaction. If we take rapid action which might decrease domestic demand and others don’t increase domestic demand so our external sector doesn’t improve, particularly in the Eurozone our largest trading partner, that might damage the economy. So we might be in a very sticky position. Can you say how worried we should be about this?Well, I think it’s always a question of balance of risks. I think the events of recent weeks suggested to me, and it’s only my judgement and I can do no more than give that, that it was the right thing to do, on putting in place a new government, for that government to demonstrate the seriousness of its intention to deal with the deficit - not just by embracing a more ambitious reduction of the deficit over the lifetime of the parliament, but by making clear that it was serious about it by doing some measures this year.I don’t believe that the scale of those measures, the 6 billion cuts, is likely to be such as to dramatically change the outlook for growth this year. And as I said earlier in response to answers, I think it does reduce some of the downside risks by taking away some of the market risk that might have occurred if there’d been a sharp upward movement in yields.Now none of this is certain; this can only be a matter of judgement; and I can do no more than give my personal judgement. But I think it is important and I'm very pleased to support the measures which the government want to put in place now to deal with the fiscal deficit.
James Fillars, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 30 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010Thank you very much. Governor, given this new era of openness you've been talking about, could you enlighten us, now that Gordon Brown has gone into the political sunset, on your view of his plans to tackle the deficit, and whether you felt that they were credible.Well, I'm not going to go into a post mortem about plans which obviously are no longer in place. They’ve been superseded by decisions by the new government. As I said before, in answer to Chris, there was a substantial reduction in the deficit built into the proposals in the March Budget. It’s not fair to say that there were no plans to reduce the deficit; there clearly were. I myself had said that I thought it might be appropriate if over the lifetime of the parliament they were more ambitious. I believe that the announcement this morning is consistent with that objective of having a more ambitious reduction of the deficit. But I don’t want to say any more than that.We’ve been through an extraordinarily difficult period and there is no doubt that the previous government was absolutely right to be concerned that, at the time when the crisis occurred, the real risk was that the very sharp falls in output in the world economy might continue. And the action that was taken around the world at the end of 2008 and the beginning of 2009 meant that the collapse of world trade and output, which was even sharper in terms of world trade than the Great Depression, lasted six months and then came to an end. And we’re embarking on a fragile and difficult recovery.One of the costs of that is that we’ve now switched a large amount of debt from the private sector to the public sector. That was necessary to deal with the immediate crisis. What we’ve now got to do is the second stage of handling this crisis which is to find
James Fillars, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 31 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010a way which is going to be difficult, lengthy and painful, of balancing the reduction of that public debt in a way that still ensures that the world economy can recover.That is a venture in which I would suggest that all economies in the world would be better off if we can work together. That is the aim of the framework that was put in place at the G20 leaders meeting last year; it’s the framework that we will return to at the G20 meeting in Korea in the summer and in the autumn. And in my view it’s very important that we can demonstrate that, just as we worked together in dealing with the downturn at the end of 2008, now we can deal with the recovery and the consolidation of public finances in a sustained way, over a period of time, by working with other countries. And I'm sure we can do it, but I hope the will is there to do it.One follow up question to that. You spoke a few moments ago very warmly of your working relationship with the outgoing Chancellor, Alistair Darling. Would you speak so warmly of the outgoing Prime Minister?Well I worked very closely with him late at night, weekends, to deal with the financial crisis. And I think when we both look back on our careers in many years to come, not now, many years to come, we will reflect that we probably had few opportunities to do something as important as the recapitalisation of the banking system in October 2008. It led, I think, the reaction of the rest of the world to that crisis. We worked incredibly closely on that. And I think that will seem a high point. And I very much valued the opportunity to work closely with Gordon Brown over many years as Chancellor and then Prime Minister. He had a remarkable period in office. And I wish him well in what I suspect is a career of which we may yet see more to come.
Page 32 Quarterly Inflation Report - 12th May 2010Jenny:	That's all we’ve got time for. Thanks very much everyone. Thank you.END