Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 15th May 2013
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013Governor, you talked about the importance of using economic analysis and applying that to the current situation. Would you agree with the Chancellor's analysis that Britain has faced a housing bust? And what is your opinion on his way of dealing with it, Help to Buy, which some people fear could be a UK equivalent of Fanny Mae or Freddie Mac. Does that fill you with some concern about the prospects, both for the housing market and the prospects for the UK budget deficit as a result of that?Well I think it's fairly clear that one of the factors associated with the weakness of the economy is the low level of transactions in the housing market, which fell very rapidly in the immediate aftermath of the banking crisis, as a source of credit, even mortgage credit dried up and that led to a sharp fall in transactions. They've recovered a little, but not as much as we might have hoped by this stage, and clearly if first time buyers are to come into the market then we will need to see the level of transactions go up.But I think we haven't had the sort of housing bust that many other countries have seen; the fall in house prices has been a lot smaller. And certainly the significant drag on the economy from that collapse in construction spending, which was seen in the United States but especially in Spain and Ireland, has not been evident here to anything like the same extent. And that's in part because we didn't have a construction boom before the crisis.So I don’t think our position is remotely comparable to those in other countries where the housing market has been dominant in determining the shape of the fall in output and spending and then the subsequent recovery.But I can see that in present circumstances something to increase the level of transactions is helpful. After all the Funding
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013for Lending Scheme is designed to boost the supply of credit and we hope that will continue to work.I think in terms of Help to Buy, I understand why people want to do things in the short run. What is most important is that down the road, when we get back to normality, we do not end up with a system of permanent taxpayer guarantees for mortgages. That would be a very dangerous path, the Bank of England has always made that clear, and I think we made it clear when we were being asked about the position of the United States, where it's still the case, the United States haven't found a way to back out of the problems of implicit taxpayer guarantees to Fanny Mae and Freddie Mac which have turned into explicit ones.So I don't think anybody wants to go down that path, and that's why the Chancellor has asked the Financial Policy Committee to opine on whether or not it would be sensible to extend the scheme, if a government three years down the road wishes to do so. And we don't yet know what conditions will be in three years' time, but I think what is very important is that we don't see this as a permanent feature of the landscape. And I don't think anyone, certainly not the Chancellor, has suggested that.If you look at Page 7, Chart 2 and Chart 3 of the economy, both the growth performance and the inflation performance, how does it make you feel as you enter retirement?Well, it's pretty obvious that the global banking crisis led to a very sharp downturn. I think we all know that and that was four or five years ago. The question is - looking ahead can we manage to get out of this and get back? And I think there are two or three things that need to be done, most of which we in the UK have done in terms of what we as a country can do, and the big unresolved issue is the international one.
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013So domestically what we need to do is to make sure that the banking sector never goes back to a system or a degree of leverage which it had prior to the crisis. And I think the actions of the Financial Policy Committee, I think the legislation to introduce a resolution scheme, the Vickers proposals are on the table, combined with a new Basel approach all goes in that direction. And I think we are pretty close, but not quite there yet, to getting a banking system in which we will in the future be able to be proud and not worry in the way that we have been worrying.Secondly, we have put in place - the government has put in place a medium term fiscal consolidation path, plenty of room for discussion about the precise parameters of it. But that we need a medium term path for fiscal consolidation seems to be agreed by everyone.What we can't do, clearly, is to ensure that the rest of the world grows at its normal historical average rate. If it were we would be in pretty good shape already by now, given the depreciation of sterling which has helped to boost external demand by offsetting the contractual effects of the fiscal consolidation.So by and large I think we're on track and what matters is when you have a crisis actually producing ideas to deal with the causes and making sure that we don't go back to the situation we were in. And I think I feel very proud that we've managed to do that.You'd welcomed the idea that the - you welcomed the Chancellor's statement about the remit reaffirming the target, but also suggesting there be more discretion in the future for the Bank. I guess the way to translate that is that the Bank should have more room and more time to bring inflation back to target.
Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013I think a lot of ordinary people would say, you've had a lot of discretion in the last few years; as you pointed out there's been inflation above target for most of the last five years, do you think you had enough discretion with the old target and do you actually think it would have helped the economy to allow inflation to go even higher for longer?No I don't think we need more discretion as such, I think the two key features of the remit which I welcome are, one - reaffirming that the central objective of monetary policy, which is the main role of a central bank, is to meet the inflation target of 2% a year; in other words the commitment to price stability. Nothing is more important than that and the Chancellor has moved - well he wasn't tempted to go down the path of giving up the target, he's reaffirmed the commitment to price stability.But the second one, which I think is important, is that one of the things that was left hanging somewhat in 1997 was precisely what was meant by flexibility in the regime of flexible inflation targeting. And I think what the Chancellor has done is not to give us more room for manoeuvre, but to make us more transparent about how we use the discretion we've already had.And I think it is sensible for the Bank to feel under more pressure to explain the judgements that we are making when we do make these decisions which imply short term trade-offs and to be more transparent about it. And I welcome that and that is what we are starting the process, beginning in this report but I'm sure there's more to be done, of being more open and transparent about the nature of those short run trade-offs.Do you think it would have affected policy or inflation if you had had this in place?
Mervyn King:Sam Fleming, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013No, no I don't, I think it might have helped our ability to explain it, but I don't think it would have affected policy no.You have some analysis in here about the household debt burden, which you show has come down relatively sharply from about 170% of incomes to 140%. I wonder if you can give an assessment of how far we are through the process of deleveraging in terms of household indebtedness and how significant this is as an impediment to the economic recovery?I think it's very hard to judge what is the appropriate ratio of debt to income without looking also at what's happened to asset prices. And the main determinant of asset prices in recent years has been the level of long term real interest rates, which remain remarkably low, and are expected to remain remarkably low for some considerable period.When you've got such low long term real interest rates, asset prices, all asset prices, will inevitably be high. And on that basis, as the Committee explained, very clearly before the crisis, it's not surprising that if people feel that asset prices, particularly house prices, are likely to remain at this high level - it's not a question of expecting them to rise further, I think that's gone, clearly; but they're not expected to fall sharply. But at this level of house prices you will see a process over one or two decades in which the housing stock moves down the generations from the retiring, dying generation to the younger generation coming into the housing stock.The younger generation will need to take out more debt. And you might expect - we had expected before the crisis that the ratio of household debt to incomes would actually go on rising for a while. Now it has come down somewhat, but I don't think you should expect dramatic reductions.
Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013The reason for concern in the future is not the current configuration of interest rates and asset prices; it's that we know that at some point real interest rates have to get back to a healthier and more normal level. Positive real interest rates are crucial for the successful operation of a market economy. The real challenge is to navigate our way back to that level.Once real interest rates are back to that level then you would expect to see some consequences for asset prices, possibly falls in asset prices. And at that point it will be important that people have had time to deleverage and to get to a point where their degree of indebtedness is not such that they find themselves in deep financial trouble when asset prices fall.Now that will take time, the banks have gone furthest and fastest in this adjustment process, but that's the sector that needed to, it was the one that was most fragile; other sectors will follow in turn.I think it is very, very difficult to say what is the optimal path. But we are on a path of deleveraging and eventually we'll get back to a world with lower levels of debt, higher real interest rates, a more normal and healthy world, where the interest rate will be able to be used again to discriminate among different investment projects.That's where we want to get to. But you don't get there by suddenly saying, oh well since the end path has positive real interest rates of, you know, 3% on average perhaps, that's where they were before for a hundred years. You know you don't suddenly push up policy rates to try and push up real interest rates to that level today, that would push us back into a deep recession.
Richard Edgar, ITV News:Mervyn King:Richard Edgar, ITV News:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013So it is this paradox of policy which I've been talking about now for four years, which is still there. And it's the difficulty of knowing the path along which you navigate to get back to our very clear destination of higher real interest rates in the longer term.We learnt today that wages are rising almost four times slower than price rises and the ONS this week blamed inflation for pushing the living standards of Britons well below those of some of our peers. How do you explain to people that you're happy in this Report to see inflation stay above the 2% target right into 2015?Well we're not happy to see inflation; we'd like inflation to come down much faster. The question is - what do you have to do to bring it down? And as I explained, at least one percentage point of the current inflation, in other words, all of the excess of inflation over the target and a bit more, is accounted for by administered and regulated prices; over which we have no control and which are largely to do with the prices set either by government actions or regulated companies, utility companies. That's the bit that's caused the squeeze on real living standards.Our aim is to bring inflation down to 2% and if we can keep it down to 2% and keep it there that's what would make us happy. We're certainly not happy with the present situation. But to acknowledge that it doesn't follow from that that the best thing to do is to raise interest rates and push the economy into a recession. Because the only way that we could bring inflation further down is by pushing wage growth down even further, perhaps into negative levels. That isn't going to benefit anyone's living standards.So are you sure there’s nothing more you can do?
Mervyn King:Ben Chu, The Independent:Mervyn King:Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013Well we can do more in terms of thinking about the path along which we try to encourage a recovery and we've explored all different angles and avenues. But there is no easy way through this and it's silly to pretend that there is.Each month the Committee meets and makes a considered judgement about whether it would be sensible to do more to stimulate growth, which will mean perhaps inflation coming down a little more slowly; but nevertheless that growth might push up productivity and expand output and affect wages in a positive direction. Or whether we hold back and don't do anything in the hope that inflation will then come down a little bit faster. But that might also mean that wages won't rise quite as quickly.These are difficult balancing judgements to make and that's what the Committee is paid to do and what it does do month by month.Governor, the IMF recently recommended that the UK Government should slow the pace of the fiscal consolidation in order to support the recovery. The Chancellor has put a lot of emphasis on the IMF's judgement in the past. If they were to follow that advice, what impact would you anticipate it having on the growth and inflation projections outlined in this report?Well it would clearly weaken growth. But I think the key thing to make here - this is an argument and a debate that's been vastly overplayed. As far as I can see, almost everyone believes that countries need medium term plans for fiscal consolidation and they need the automatic stabilisers to be allowed to work to provide an endogenous, flexible response to the movements in the economy as time passes. That’s what we've got and that's why the deficit hasn't come down anywhere near as much as had been hoped back in 2010 because the economy has been weaker. That seems to me a highly appropriate way to go.
Nina Kojima, National Radio, Television Slovenia:Mervyn King:Nina Kojima, National Radio, Television Slovenia:Mervyn King:Nina Kojima, National Radio, Television Slovenia:Mervyn King: LaughterNina Kojima, National Radio, Television Slovenia:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013And I think one of the issues that always comes up when discussing with our partners across the Atlantic, whether in the US or the IMF, is that their automatic stabilisers are much, much weaker than ours, hence, in order to have any flexibility they need to take discretionary fiscal actions. That's not true here; our automatic stabilisers are very large, given our much higher marginal tax rates and the impact of the downturn in the economy on government spending. So these things automatically occur and it has had a big effect on the deficit.The scale of this is much bigger, I think, than any of the quibbling at the margins that seem to come out in much of the debate to which you refer.I hope you don't mind a question from ... I didn't get the last big, National Radio Television of?Slovenia. Welcome.Thank you, so there was a lot of rumours lately ... Join the sterling area if you'd like to.Pardon.
Mervyn King:Nina Kojima, National Radio, Television Slovenia:Mervyn King:Nina Kojima, National Radio, Television Slovenia:Mervyn King:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013By all means think of joining the sterling area.Not at all I guess. Well there were speculations that Slovenia is the next who is going to ask for bailout and the government issued more bonds just two weeks ago. I was wondering if Bank of England is among those central banks who bought the government bonds, if so why and how much?Sorry, support - say that last bit again, is the Bank of England among the central banks that?Those central banks who bought the bonds the Slovenian Government issued a couple of weeks ago and if so, why and for how much?No we're not - we haven't bought government bonds of other countries, no, we buy government debt issued by the UK Government. We have a very small amount of foreign exchange reserves which we invest in the government bonds, essentially of three countries, the United States, Germany and Japan, because these are the currencies in which we would intervene. But in fact we have never chosen to intervene, but it's a very small fund which we keep there to enable us to intervene if we wish to do so. But we do not diversify our holdings of government bonds.You talked about the absence of external demand and without it - if the rest of the world was growing as well as it has been then the UK would be in a much stronger position. It isn't though, and it appears that we have effectively abandoned the rebalancing strategy to a large degree in light of that. And I just wondered if you - I mean Help to Buy being an example of the hair of the dog.
Mervyn King:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013And in light of that do you believe that this abandoning of the rebalancing strategy in the short term is the correct policy to be taking, and do you think we have abandoned it?No we haven't abandoned it and you can't abandon it, we have to do it. So we certainly haven't abandoned it. I think the point I'd make to you is that one of the developments in the last year or 15 months which needs to be, I think, taken into account when assessing all this is that there have been two factors which have made growth look weaker and our trade position look worse. That is in fact the case in an underlying sense and which I think will be revealed as we go through the next 12 months.The first factor is North Sea oil, a lagged response to some of the tax changes that were made earlier was to run down North Sea output, even faster than the underlying decline is that coming as we're working through the less and less profitable fields. And that reduced both output and affected GDP growth last year in 2012 and it also affected the trade deficit.If you look at the trade deficit excluding North Sea oil, what you see is that up to the period before sterling fell sharply in 2007 to the beginning of 2009 then our trade deficit moved around from year to year, but it averaged almost 3% of GDP. Since then it’s averaged about 1.5%. It looks worse for last year because of the fall in North Sea oil output.The reason this is important is that there have been tax changes made prior to last year which have led now to an increase in investment which will produce more North Sea output in the next couple of years.So although there is a long term downward trend of North Sea oil output production we will see some recovery in the next couple of
Paul Wallace, The Economist:Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013years. That will both make the trade deficit look better and reveal that the underlying growth of output was not quite as negative as it might have looked last year, and we’ll see that coming through later this year.The other factor that was relevant for the output figures of course was the very sharp fall in construction, which all the information we have from our agents and from surveys suggest we won’t see a repeat of that large fall. And you don’t need to see a pick-up in construction output only that you don’t see a repeat of that large fall for a larger underlying growth rate to come through during this year.So I think that the rebalancing strategy has certainly not been abandoned, it can’t be abandoned, it’s the only way we can get back to a new equilibrium and it will take time to get there. But it is working and we’ve seen a big rise in manufactured exports since the fall in sterling.So I think try and see it in perspective a bit more, don’t get entirely put off by the weak figures for both the trade deficit and output growth during calendar 2012.How likely is it that the economy would have experienced a normal recovery by post-war standards but for the euro crisis?Well certainly but for the world economy it certainly would have, if the world economy had grown at its average historical rate then we would be well into a recovery, with significant improvement both in output and in terms of our trade position.Now of course the scale of the fall in output 2008 to 2009 was unprecedented for the post-war period, you have to go a long way back to see anything as big as that. So it would have taken longer,
Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013in terms of duration it wouldn’t have been a typical post-war recovery but in terms of the speed of recovery it would have been.I think the big problem that we all face is that you can make a similar statement about most countries round the world, that for each country on its own if the rest of the world had grown normally we would have been in a position to have a much faster recovery. And this is a question of why the rebalancing is so important and it’s not an issue that any one country can easily tackle on its own by taking domestic policy measures.You can see countries in the periphery in the euro area have been constrained to their policy because they don’t have the ability quickly to regain competitiveness and they don’t seem to have much alternative. And they understandably think that they can’t simply just abandon their public finances and do nothing about it.But they’re facing extraordinary constraints. And the euro area as a whole has not found a way to navigate back to rebalancing the euro area as a whole, which, if it were to happen, would go a very long way to help the world economy as a whole. You can see how our colleagues in the United States are still deeply concerned about developments in the euro area. But in Asia too, you can see that the challenge of rebalancing their economies is not one that’s straightforward and is being accompanied by slower growth.So all of us face a challenge and I think one of the lessons that I’ve drawn from the last decade really, both before the crisis and afterwards, is that each of us seemed to be doing what made sense from our own domestic point of view, but we’re all worse off because it didn’t lead to the right global outcome.
Guy Johnson, Bloomberg Television:Mervyn King:David Smith, Sunday Times:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013There seems to have been a change of heart on negative deposit rates at the ECB and I’m just wondering whether you feel that the financial system is now more capable of coping with a negative deposit rate than it was before?I think it is but I think there are reasons - I mean the Committee is - we’ve made sure that we’re in a position where we can implement it if we wanted to, but I think there are some good reasons why we don’t want to. One is that in terms of providing stimulus it’s not clear to us that it’s the most effective method of doing it. It would have an impact on smaller banks and building societies that might lead them to pull back on the extension of credit rather than improve it, which would perhaps harm rather than help the recovery. And I think if you look at our forecasts for inflation it’s clear there isn’t a great deal of room to manoeuvre here.So, you know, I think we are cautious, but it’s still an instrument that remains open to the Committee if it wishes to use it in the future. All I’d say at present is it is on the table, I can’t comment on the euro area, but it’s an instrument that’s available to the MPC, so far it’s chosen not to deploy that.Governor, at the bottom of Page 7 in the overview the Report talks about demand and supply over the forecast period and says that if demand is stronger supply is also likely to be stronger and vice versa. I just wonder how that relates to how the Committee thinks about spare capacity, is this an economy with a lot of spare capacity or is it appropriate to think about spare capacity in a flexible way, in other words demand brings forth supply and so on, how does the Committee think about that?
Mervyn King:Charlie Bean:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013I think the latter is the direction in which we think; namely that if you use conventional measures of spare capacity though clearly it is spare capacity, just look at the labour market with unemployment broadly flat and likely to remain so. So there clearly is spare capacity. But I think it’s also the case that if demand were to pick up quickly then there would be a period over which demand could grow at much faster rates than at present and would bring forth the supply that would meet that demand.So I think we do feel there’s an element here which is why we talk about effective supply. But there is no doubt that this is an area where we do not claim to understand precisely what is going on. If you look at what happened to actual productivity, measured output per person hour worked, it has fallen very sharply and it’s well below where it would have been had we merely carried on in our pre-crisis path.Now part of that I think you can attribute to the consequences of the sharp fall in actual demand and the fact that there are probably resources of labour in firms that could be put to more productive use if demand were to pick up.But there is also a genuine puzzle, which is perhaps the damage done to the financial system has made it more difficult for new and innovative firms to set up. And made it more difficult in particular for firms in areas of the economy where we need to see capacity run down to switch resources and finance the new investment in areas of the economy like manufacturing and export sectors where we need capacity to expand. But perhaps I can ask Charlie or Spencer to say something about productivity?Well, as you say it’s one of the big puzzles. If you turn to I guess Page 28 of the Report it’s a good way to see the extent of the puzzle, Chart 3.3, also for that matter Chart 3.2 above. You can
Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013see actually the employment growth in this downturn has actually been surprisingly strong compared to previous recessions, whereas we know output performance has been pretty poor and that’s reflected in Chart 3.3 with this stark contrast between very strong employment growth and weak output growth.And the big puzzle is what’s driving that? Some of it we can trace to things like the lower rates of capital investment, the decline in North Sea oil output that the Governor referred to is also relevant in this consideration, because obviously North Sea oil extraction doesn’t take a lot of labour input.But factors like that explain a very small fraction of the 15% or so shortfall of productivity relative to its pre-crisis trend. Of this the bulk of it, there’s really two classes of story, one that relate essentially to endogenous supply of the sort that you referred to. So for instance we hear stories from some of our business contacts that they, in a thin market when there’s not many buyers, they have to work much harder to make sales and more effort has to go into winning contracts and so forth. Now if the market picks up then you get some endogenous productivity potentially appearing. Equally there are some businesses where you need to keep a minimum level of skilled labour there and so forth. So that’s the story on one side.It should also be said the moderation in pay growth has helped to allow firms to keep workers on as also has the relatively low level of interest rates. Previous recessions, say like the early '90s, interest rates were high, businesses would have had to sharply cut back on labour, this time round they’ve been able to hang on to skilled labour.But there is also the second issue that the government alluded to which is the possible impact of the impaired banking system on
Svenja O’Donnell, Bloomberg:Mervyn King:Alex Brummer, Daily Mail:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013this. And in particular, insofar as potentially innovative expanding firms have not been able to get as much access to credit as they would like, that may have dragged on the supply side. And if demand recovered but those firms were still in a position where they couldn’t really respond to supply, you might see some inflationary pressures develop.So one of the big issues for the Committee is balancing off these two possible stories, how much can we expect supply to respond as demand recovers and how quickly, or is it a case that we have to do further work on repairing the banking system before we can really expect supply to improve.Governor this is your final Inflation Report press conference, in your many years in the job what’s been your biggest regret?I don’t think - I’ll leave you to comment on the past, I think this is not a time for looking back, this is a time for me for looking forward to a new life, there will be plenty of time in the future to look back and reflect. But I don’t think this is the day I want to do that.The Report has rather a full discussion of Funding for Lending and it makes the point that because RBS and Lloyds have been repairing their balance sheets but they’re not really responding to the challenge of Funding for Lending. I wonder if you feel that if we’d been more radical at the point of the banking crisis, recapitalised the banks more strongly and made them face up to their bad debts more radically so we didn’t have a lot of zombie companies, I think that’s partly what Charlie was referring to, that we’d be in a better position now and growth would be more robust?
Mervyn King:Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013Well the answer to that is yes, and we did say so at the time, I mean not publicly but we did make it clear that a more radical recapitalisation was necessary.I don’t think it would have changed the global picture clearly we’d still have suffered a lot from what happened in the global picture, and I rather doubt that there would be a major difference. But I think we would have been in a better position, yes. It’s not too late but the Financial Policy Committee has been taking the measures that is necessary, it’s handed the baton on now to the Prudential Regulation Authority and that is being taken forward with each of the banks.In the Funding for Lending Scheme do you consider the extension that was given essentially to specialist lenders, buy to let companies, do you consider buy to let to be as, if you like, socially necessary to support as first time buyer lending? It seems like the FLS is often justified on the basis of first time buyer lending but many of the banks have used it for buy to let?In a minute I’ll ask Paul to comment on the precise way in which we extended it but we don’t see this extension as a game-changer in any sense. It was the sensible thing to do and many sensible things that are worth doing are not game-changers so we did it. But it’s not going to transform the picture.What we wanted to do was to make sure that if, as looked likely, it seemed sensible that we were going to extend the scheme, that we would extend it into 2014, that we would extend it in a way that preserved and enhanced the incentives for banks to lend this year, by making sure that their access next year depended on how much they lent this year. And that's what we intended and tried to do. So I think it was a useful thing.
Paul Fisher:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013I think the Funding for Lending Scheme has already achieved its objectives largely. Remember the objectives here were to reduce the funding costs of the banks. Now that's been achieved. It may not all be because of the Funding for Lending Scheme, but there's no doubt that the funding costs of banks for have fallen and that the cost of mortgages in turn has also fallen. And there is a chart in the report, I think it's 1.19, which shows that information on small businesses, which is not easy to get but - 1.9 sorry 1.9.Chart 1.9 distribution of loan rates offered to small businesses. You can see there that according to the Federation of Small Businesses there has been a shift to the left. That is a downward shift in the loan rates charged to small businesses. So I think the objectives have been achieved. Now that isn’t going to transform the economy but again the Funding for Lending Scheme could help but it isn’t a game-changer, but it’s certainly a help. It was worth doing, we’ve done it and it’s helped.Now on the precise ways in which we extended it let me ask Paul to comment.Yes we’ve extended the scheme obviously into next year and we’ve given particular incentive to the banks to lend to small businesses including unincorporated businesses.Now in doing that we are not seeking to make any moral or social judgements about which bits of lending are more important than others, that's not our aim. It would be very wrong of us to try and do that as a central bank. What we’re trying to do is support the economy as a whole and the reason we’ve put the incentive in to support SME lending is because that is the bit which was obviously suffering the greatest restriction on the supply of credit when you look across the sectors.
Larry Elliot, The Guardian:Mervyn King: Laughter Mervyn King:Heather Stewart, The Observer: Mervyn King: Heather Stewart, The Observer:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013So that's the motivation for doing it. I mean I’ll leave it to you and others to judge whether or not buy to let is a better form of providing housing than others. I mean the rented sector is actually quite important in the economy as a whole. But what we’re trying to do is support the economy through this scheme, not support particular types of lending per se. But SME credit is very important for future growth of the economy and that's why we’ve put that incentive in.Governor you've entertained us many times at these Inflation Report Press Conferences with your football analogies so can I put one to you here? You’re about to hand over the team to a new boss, are you handing over a team which is challenging for a Champions League slot, one that's pootling along in mid-table or, as the recent results would suggest, one that's battling against relegation?Well it’s been a difficult year.But I'm very optimistic about the future. It’s a team of very good young players. And I think with the right leadership you can look forward to a very successful future season. But I'm not going to predict precise numbers or positions.I'm not going to use a football analogy. Thank you very much.You made a point that the markets are expecting interest rates to remain below 1% in four years' time and they seem to have reached that conclusion without any explicit guidance from the MPC. Doesn’t that suggest that there will be little benefit to be
Mervyn King:Tim Wallace, City AM:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013gained from introducing an approach of explicit forward guidance as some have suggested?Well I think the way the debate on guidance has moved has been to move away from what you might call unconditional guidance based entirely on lengths of time for which rates will remain low, where, as you point out, the market has a very clear view that rates are likely to remain low for a long time and to move it much more in the area of conditional guidance. This is the approach the Federal Reserve has taken, in which the statement about the future part is conditional upon the path of the economy.Now that's a debate that will be had and the MPC will be discussing it. Mark Carney has already starting talking to the existing MPC members about it, I've encouraged that. And they will be reporting back to you at the next press conference in August. You'll be the first people to learn of this I assure you, at the press conference, and I think it’s very important that those involved, it doesn’t include me, but those involved, will have time now to think through very carefully what the Committee will wish to do.It will be a decision of the Monetary Policy Committee, not that of the Treasury but of the Monetary Policy Committee, and they’ll give their views and make their decisions for the August Inflation Report. And it’s very important that they’re given time to reflect and think through the questions. So I don’t think either I or anyone else will be wanting to comment on this until we get to August. But that means you have a lot to look forward to at the next press conference.Governor you and a few other MPC members have been voting for more QE in recent meetings, although the economy seems to
Mervyn King:Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Becky Barrow, Daily Mail:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013be improving a little bit. When do you think the time for more QE will at last be completely over?Well I can’t judge. This is something we look at month by month and I'm not even going to speculate on what we did last week. You'll have to wait until next week to see the minutes and the views of people on the Committee on that. But I mean the whole point about this is that it’s something that we do look at month by month.But I think you can see from the forecast published today that this is a, you know, it’s a difficult decision. You can argue either way based on the projections, and as Charlie said there are very difficult judgements. We have to balance one kind of risk off against another; it’s always difficult to know what the precise decision to take is in that situation. But the Committee will do it firmly and clearly every month.Governor, the ECB is giving consideration to the purchase of asset backed securities in periphery economies. You've always been quite resistant to this in the past. Is that still your view?I think that we’re like the Federal Reserve; we’ll buy stuff if it’s guaranteed by the government. We’re not in the business of putting taxpayers’ money at risk. And indeed every time I go to the Treasury Committee they’re always very, very determined to ensure that any decision that involves putting taxpayers’ money at risk is a decision for the Chancellor, not for the Monetary Policy Committee. I can’t see any reason to go against the wishes of Parliament in this respect.On the subject of base rates staying below 1% for the next four years, this will be quite disappointing for pensioners and other
Mervyn King:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013people who rely on income from their savings. What message would you like to send to them?Well, I have great sympathy for them and indeed as a pensioner myself - having just acquired that status, I understand exactly why they are concerned. But I also think that the people who will suffer even more are the younger generation who, when trying to put money aside for a pension in the future, will find that to provide for a pension is extraordinarily expensive when interest rates are so low.I'm certainly not happy about the prospect that rates will stay low for so long. I would like to get back sooner rather than later to a world of much higher interest rates, more normal levels of interest rates. But it won’t be the lack of a wish to do that that creates the problem; it’s the state of the economy. And once the economy improves then it may be possible to raise rates sooner than the current market expectation.Much will depend, as I've said several times today, on what happens in the rest of the world. We are very much dependent on what happens in the rest of the world including what happens in the euro area. If slow growth in the euro area persists and continues, that is going to make it much more difficult for us to get out of the difficulties that we have.Base rates, the market is expecting interest rates to stay at 0.5% until the second half of 2016, gilt yields are below 2%. I just wondered what more can monetary policy do in this environment? And does it have to operate through the banking system, through the transmission system in future; is that the only option left?Well I mean as I said there are clearly limits to what monetary policy can hope to achieve in the present situation in any form.
Question, German Business Weekly:Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013So I don’t think there is a magic bullet here that can be summoned up and used to expand demand.But I would like to stress although we don’t see a particularly rapid recovery in the next few quarters but we do see a recovery and I think there are good reasons for that. If you look back to 2012, it goes back to what I said to you earlier, if you take out the impact of construction and North Sea oil, the UK economy grew by almost 1.5% last year, through 2012, exactly the same as the US economy.Now we’re all struggling, even the US economy is struggling to get back to a growth rate that it thinks is acceptable particularly when coming out of such a steep downturn, and we are too. But we are coming out of it and I think these temporary depressing factors of construction and North Sea oil, there are very good reasons to suppose that they will not be acting as such downward forces during this year. In which case once you remove them you do have the impetus of a modest recovery going forward, which I hope will start to feed on itself and build up to a stronger recovery.That's broadly what is in our central projection and as far as our central projection is concerned there are risks both on the upside as well as the downside.There has been a lot of debate here in the UK about the pros and cons of staying or leaving the European Union. Where do you come down on this? Would it be very damaging for the UK economy if the UK were to leave the EU?Well as you can imagine I don’t take a position on this question. I think it would be quite wrong of me to use my position to give a view on it and I don’t intend to do so. This is a political question.
Claire Jones, Financial Times:Spencer Dale:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013The government has answered its view and we will carry out our responsibilities of trying to see an economic recovery within the context of an absolute firm commitment to price stability in the medium term. And I'm absolutely confident that my opposite number in the Bundesbank would share that view too.Bearing in mind your comments a few minutes ago about it not being an occasion to look back today but to look forward, I’d like to ask a question of Spencer Dale, of Charlie Bean and Paul Fisher. Do you all share the Governor’s scepticism that we’re now at the limits of what monetary policy can achieve? And also what you voiced in the previous press conference that, you know, we risk irrational exuberance in asset prices with a lack of benefit to the real economy, or do you think a more activist approach can lead to a situation where the UK economy can achieve escape velocity?So I agree with the way the Governor set up the challenges facing monetary policy and I think I’d add a third one. So the Governor said at the moment when setting monetary policy one is trying to balance this risk associated with inflation being above target and the need to bring inflation back down to target, alongside the risk that if we don’t carry on supporting the sort of gradual recovery we’re seeing that could potentially derail the recovery. And I think I’d add a third risk to that which is the recognition that if you keep monetary policy very low for long periods of time that can encourage some types of risk taking, which at the moment is the types of risk taking we want to see, but which may end up over a period of time leading to problems in terms of financial stability.And I'm afraid that is the nature of the challenges we face when we’re setting monetary policy at the moment. There is no simple solution here, one is having to balance off these three risks where some people say why aren’t you bringing down inflation more
Guy Johnson, Bloomberg Television:Mervyn King:William Keegan, The Observer:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013quickly, we say well because I'm worried about the recovery. Others are saying why aren’t you doing more to support the recovery, we say because I'm worried about inflation.I don’t think there are simple answers here and I think we all on the Committee are recognising that we’re trying to balance these three sorts of significant risks and trying, as the Governor said, to try to find a path which tries to balance all of those risks together.Governor, I'm wondering if you could give us your thoughts on the impact that the financial transaction tax will have on the operations of the financial markets and the British economy?Well I don’t think it’s likely to help very much, and indeed the thing I find most striking is that within Europe I can’t find anyone in the central banking community who thinks it’s a good idea. So I think you will see over the next months some considerable debate which will end up with more time and reflection being taken before designing anything in this area.Of course the words financial transactions tax, mean very different things to different people. Some people would use it to cover something like stamp duty on equities. Others would use it to a much greater extent for a small tax on all financial transactions. I don’t think we’re remotely close to getting any clear view on any of this; all I would say is that I can understand why at least some politicians feel reluctant to express their true scepticism about the merits of this idea in public. But I can assure you I do hear an enormous scepticism even from quarters which are alleged to be behind it.It’s not really a question. As you know Mr Governor sometimes journalists take the opportunity to make their own statements in
Applause Mervyn King:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013question time, but I think on this occasion I may be allowed. Christopher Fildes and I came into the City a long time ago and there was a custom that the senior member of the group, on certain occasions, gave a vote of thanks. Well it turns out that we are now - we have now reached that age.So I'm speaking on behalf of Christopher and I hope many others thanking you for a continuous virtuoso performance, 82 successive Inflation Report Conferences. The Inflation Report was born as we know as a result of a certain disaster, Black Wednesday. It was announced in October 1992 by Norman Lamont. The first one was in the spring of ’93, so it’s in its coming of age, 21st year coming up; you’ve had 20 of these. You have attended every one; some of us I have to say are usually in Provence in August but never mind. And the wicked thought has occurred to me that original target range of one to four might have been kept and might have been quite useful recently but there we are, that's the opinion.But I really would like to thank you and I’d make the point that so many of us here, the Today programme is wonderful but when we hear politicians on the Today programme we don’t get the clarity of answers that, whatever we think of them, that we get from you. You've done your best to help us through thick and thin, and there's been a lot of thin, and I think I speak for all of us in saying thank you very much Governor and enjoy your retirement and I don’t believe you’re really going to retire.Well thank you very much Bill for those words and thank all of you for coming so patiently over all these years. There are some things about this job that I certainly won’t miss but one thing I will miss are these regular Inflation Report Press Conferences. They
ENDPage 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th May 2013are probably the one event I've looked forward to and prepared hard for and believed have been the most valuable. And I think can I thank you all also for raising the level of economic debate and discussion in this country significantly in comparison with when I started.So thank you for doing that and I'm sure you will enormously enjoy working with my successor who will be at least as lucid in the future, and I wish you all the very best in explaining the travails and ups and downs of the British economy to your readers and your viewers and listeners. Thank you all.