Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 13th February 2013
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013Last week, Mark Carney, the incoming Governor of the Bank of England, suggested there might be a role for the Bank in boosting the economy to provide some form of forward guidance about what it's going to do, and also that there might be a role for the asset purchase facility to buy assets other than government bonds.These are options which the MPC has looked at in the past and rejected. Perhaps you could reiterate why they're a bad idea or whether we might be seeing a change?Well, there are two different aspects you mention there. One is guidance - that covers a multitude of sins, and the Federal Reserve, interestingly, did try to go down the path of unconditional guidance by saying it would keep interest rates low for a certain period of time.Now I think we felt there was no need for us to do that, because market expectations were very close to those in the United States anyway. And it's interesting that the Federal Reserve has backed away from that rather quickly, to give instead statements about the conditions under which it would continue stimulating the economy.What we did obviously last week was to make a statement about the fact that we were prepared to look through the deviation of inflation from target for an unusually long period, because of the nature of the reasons that have pushed it up and because of the weakness of the domestic economy.Now I think underlying this is a factor that's common to all central banks, which is that when inflation targeting came in in the 1990s, the shocks that occurred in the subsequent 15 years were primarily shocks from the demand side of the economy - either
Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013the economy was growing too quickly and the inflation outlook looked too high, so policy had to be tightened, or demand fell; policy needed to be eased.And in that case, the guidance that was needed about the speed at which inflation would be brought back to target was rather straightforward. If the economy was growing too quickly and it was from a demand shock, then we would tighten policy. And everyone was very much in the same boat.When the crisis hit, clearly it didn't need to give very much guidance - it was obvious that we needed to ease monetary policy, and we did so. I think it's only in the last couple of years that the challenge of explaining the nature of the downturn - why this is not simply through a temporary deviation of weakness in demand that will automatically recover to its previous long-run trend - has to be explained. And that is what is driving the way in which we are determining the horizon over which we will bring inflation back to target.And in that sense all central banks have had to expand their, “guidance”, but not in terms of what they would do in policy, but in terms of what their reaction function is: how they are thinking about policy, and under what circumstances they would tighten or ease policy further.You can call it guidance, you can call it explaining the policy reaction function - I don't think the words matter very much, but all central banks are doing the same thing.When it comes to asset purchases, I think the Committee's in absolutely the same position it's always been, which is it's looked at the range of assets it can buy - we had a long discussion of this recently. There's not much point buying assets which are traded
Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013in a deep and liquid market. Buying government bonds achieves that objective very easily, to get money out into the economy. In terms of trying to deal with markets that are temporarily illiquid, we were successful in dealing with that quite quickly, with both the commercial paper market and the corporate bond market, both of which are functioning normally now. And companies are indeed making great use of the corporate bond market as well as the equity market.If we were to buy other assets that would create risk to taxpayers, well that can't be a decision for the Central Bank - I don't think anyone on the MPC believes that's a decision for the Central Bank; that has to be a decision for the Treasury.But I think we've gone, you know, beyond that stage now. I think the real question, as I tried to put across in the opening statement, is that there is a limit - this what Mark Carney himself said last week - there's a limit to the extent to which any monetary policy can go on trying to stimulate private sector demand in a set of circumstances - and this is the key point - in a set of circumstances when the private sector has come to the realisation that the path along which private demand was moving was unsustainable.That path of private demand has to fall to a new, lower level. You can't get back to the old level just by stimulating with monetary policy; there is an adjustment of the real pattern of behaviour, demand and output in the economy. And from that perspective, you have to go right to the heart of what has got to be the new equilibrium for our economy, which is a combination of relying more on external demand and trying, through supply side improvements, to justify people's - trying to raise their expectations of future incomes, so that they would be willing to go
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013back to a somewhat higher path of demand than appears attractive at present.I think those are big challenges facing all central banks, but if you don't diagnose the underlying problem correctly, you won't get to the right solution.We've heard from the ONS this morning that real incomes in the UK have been falling since 2009, but they're now down to the levels they were in 2002 And I know that you've talked about this a lot, and we've asked you about this a lot. And last time you said that the squeeze was starting to abate. But the problem is that for as long as inflation is above wages, you're going to see real incomes being squeezed.And people will now look at this; they'll see that inflation is going to be high than expected. And can you definitively, or at least give some kind of a prediction as to when that squeeze is going to finish, so when people will see an actual increase in their real wages?I don't think anyone can give a definitive prediction of that, and what we have been surprised by since the last Report was the impact of these administered prices in pushing inflation up. Now to the extent that it's tuition fees, I don't think that has much effect either on the economy, since the payments aren’t going to be made for many years, or on the underlying inflationary pressures. It's almost like a change in the index of inflation.It's a bit of an own goal, because it looks as if inflation is worse without any change in the underlying behaviour in the economy. And clearly, the attempt to put up the prices charged by utilities, as a means of financing investment or paying for green charges, green policies, all of these things are pushing up administered
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013prices in a way that does not reflect any change in the state of the underlying economy.If you like, it's a bit of a self-inflicted goal in terms of the damage done to real take home pay; perhaps another way of trying to implement fiscal consolidation through moving up the price level. But it's clearly affecting real take home pay.Now this is not the result of easy monetary policy, and nor does it reflect what's going on in the economy. As you've seen, domestic wages are absolutely either rock solid or if anything the rate of increase in money wages is falling back a little. But I think we should think of it as basically being flat and stable, and that is a thing to which we have attached a great deal of importance.So I'm afraid that, to the extent that the inflationary pressures are coming from outside, through administered prices and regulated prices, not only do we have no control over that, it's actually impossible for us to predict it.Governor, you talked a lot in your speech in Belfast and this morning about supply side reforms as the means of needing to boost growth and boost the recovery. Yet the MPC has cut the chances again of a faster recovery in its forecast today.Does this mean that you're less confident that the government is going to implement the supply side reforms you've been calling for?No, I don' think we know what the government will do. The government has to make that decision. The point I want to make is that - I think there's been a slight confusion between two different propositions, which may be subtly different, but they are very important in terms of policy.
Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013The one is that our asset purchase programme is in some sense being less effective, and the other proposition is that any monetary stimulus is going to be less effective in bringing forward spending from the future.The first proposition I don't think is true. Our ability to increase the amount of money in the economy by buying assets is really undiminished. It's the impact of those measures of general monetary stimulus, which would just be the same for cuts in interest rates, to persuade people to spend more today, when they know that the long-run path of spending is going to be lower than they used to think.And you can bring it forward for a period, but you can't go on doing it indefinitely. It's as if you're running up an ever-steeper hill.And that's the challenge, and I think therefore you have to confront that and say - well, what can we do about this ever-steeper hill? And the answer is - we have to recognise that in future the UK will need to depend more on external demand to maintain a given path of output, and that the great attraction of supply side reforms is that they do offer a way of encouraging people to be willing to spend more - both in terms of increasing the prospective rate of return on investment, but also in terms of raising future incomes and hence justifying higher consumer spending today.And that analysis is important; that's our job to put out the analysis. And I think it's then obviously the government's job to put together a package of supply side reforms which would visibly be seen to have an impact and change expectations. And
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King: Larry Elliot, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013changing expectations about the future is fundamental to being able to persuade people to spend more now.To go back to 20 years ago, Governor, probably the two of us were the only ones here - well maybe my colleague Mr Keegan was here at that time - three of us -You're older than you look, Larry.But no doubt a lot wiser. At that time, the inflation target was a range; we had a 1 - 4% inflation target. And the idea was that inflation should be somewhere in the middle of that range.I just wonder, given that the Bank hasn't hit the inflation target for four years; and is not likely to, according to today's forecast, for another two years; and the reason that you're giving is that it would be unrealistic to do so, given the contribution of administered prices - whether we should actually change the target back to where we were in the early 1990s, 1993, where it was a range target rather than a spot target? Because if you're not actually going to hit the target, and have no hope of hitting it really for two years, isn't the Bank's credibility somewhat impaired by this long inability to hit a target which you think is actually pretty much unattainable?No. Two comments on that. One is we're not saying it's unattainable. What we're saying is the central path doesn't come back to the target for a couple of years. However, in many ways that means that it's not much worse than a 50-50 chance. So we're not saying there's no chance of hitting the target - in fact, there's quite a good chance of hitting the target. Inflation could go below the target. It is very uncertain.
Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013And the whole point of the Fan Charts, which we pioneered almost 20 years ago, was indeed to try and get across the idea that forecasts aren't numbers; they are ranges. There's a lot of uncertainty attached to them.But if you go back to 1993, the reason the target was 1 - 4% was actually that inflation was starting off near the top of the range and people wanted to bring it down. It was a temporary target; it wasn't intended to be a permanent one.And I think actually it's better to have a - be very clear about what the central target is, but to recognise that the chances that you'll be actually at the central target are going to be very slim; you'll be either above or below, but trying gradually to get back to it.The real difference between now and 1993 is very instructive. If you go back to the Inflation Report in 1993 - look at the very last paragraph of it. What it said was - well actually inflation has fallen back a bit, but inflation expectations have not. And the new regime will be effective if, and only if, in the years to come, we are successful in bringing inflation expectations down to be close to the target.Now I think that one of the great successes of the inflation target rate regime is that it has anchored inflation expectations. And because we have anchored inflation expectations, we now do have the flexibility to allow inflation to be above the target for a while, in order to support the economy.If we saw evidence that inflation expectations were not consistent with the target in the medium term, and that wage increases, for example, were picking up to levels that we thought were inconsistent with achieving the target in the medium term, then we would have to tighten policy. It's the success in anchoring
Richard Edgar, ITV News:Mervyn King:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013inflation expectations that's given us the flexibility that we have been able to use.Now clearly the shocks to the economy have been so great that even that flexibility has not prevented a very large fall in output and employment. But the flexibility that we have been able to use has been extremely valuable. And that I think reflects the changes over 20 years in our success in anchoring inflation expectations.Governor, there's quite a big jump in your inflation forecast. Are you saying that it's okay for inflation to be above these targets for the next couple of years?Well, it's not desirable. But what we're saying is - given this prospect for inflation over the next couple of years, we want to make clear that we would accommodate that, in order to support a recovery in the economy, provided that we felt that in the medium term inflation expectations remain anchored and that the evidence of domestic costs, particularly nominal wages, were consistent with that.And what I'd point to is that what we've been quite successful at doing in the last few years is holding the rate of growth of average money wages to 2% a year. That's well below the level that you would normally think of as consistent with the inflation target, and I think it's why it demonstrates that it's consistent with the idea that inflation expectations are anchored, and it demonstrates that domestic inflationary pressure is certainly not out of control.And for the other reasons that we see, we are content to accommodate these increases in administered and regulated prices. We see no virtue in pushing unemployment up from where we are in order to bring market inflation down again in
Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News:Mervyn King:Sam Fleming, The Times:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013order to be low enough to offset the administered and regulated prices.In the short run, we'll have to accommodate this; it's not desirable, but that's the hand we have to play.Is policy appropriate for the economy to achieve what Mark Carney has described as escape velocity? What if we get another six to 12 months of stagnation? What are the options then?Well, we all examine this month by month, and you'll see a record of our debate and discussion at last week's meeting in the minutes that are published next week. And the Committee has had long discussions about a whole range of policies.I think what we feel at present is that, as I said earlier, we need to rebalance the economy, and one of the things that's holding back the ability to supply sufficient credit is that we do need to make sure that our banking system - whatever other people's banking systems are doing - our banking system needs to be visibly and demonstrably adequately capitalised. And that's why the Financial Policy Committee made its recommendations in December to the FSA. They will report back in March, and we hope that then banks will take the appropriate action - I don't want to pre-judge what that should be - but take the appropriate action to make sure that their banks' capital levels are consistent with our ability to make very clear that the banks are adequately capitalised. And that should have a favourable impact on their ability to raise funds and on the cost at which they can do that.You mentioned supply side reforms; you also mentioned the need to become more reliant on external demand for the UK. We've obviously had a 20% depreciation in sterling, and it really hasn't
Mervyn King:Claire Jones, Financial Times:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013promoted that rebalancing yet. I wonder first of all why the MPC thinks that rebalancing hasn't occurred so far, and does it suggest that the depreciation was insufficiently steep?I think - I don't accept the premise of the question that the deprecation hasn't helped the rebalancing. In real terms there has been a reduction in the trade deficit. And you've seen that in terms of goods exports - the exchange rate fall had a very big impact on goods exports, which rose sharply and indeed completely in line with past experience.The two factors which have held back the improvement in the trade deficit that we might have hoped for are, first of all, a clear deterioration in the external trade position on financial services, and secondly, of course, slow growth in the world economy, particularly in the euro area.So it's a difficult challenge to rebalance the economy externally when the rest of the world is growing slowly, particularly your single largest trading partner.Again, that's the hand we've been dealt, and we have to cope with that. But I think it would be wrong to say that the change in the exchange rate wasn't appropriate and part of the conditions which were necessary for the rebalancing.I'd like to talk a little bit about the dislocation that we've seen in recent months between asset prices and the real economy; I know it's something you and Mario Draghi have both touched upon. How much are you concerned that we are seeing irrational exuberance in some financial markets at the moment? And even if we're not seeing it yet, how do you envisage the Bank of England could address that if we start to see irrational
Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013exuberance before we get a self-sustaining recovery in the real economy?Well, it's an important question. I don't think central banks have been terribly successful at ensuring that market sentiment is in line with what you might call fundamentals. If there is irrational exuberance, it's often evident clearly after the event and I think there's rather little we can do by way of actions to prevent that.But I am concerned that some of the optimism in financial markets - welcome though it is to have that degree of optimism - may not be consistent with the speed at which the underlying data are likely to change in terms of trade positions and growth, particularly in other countries in the world. And I think that is something that we'll see how it develops over time.We have in place here a clear strategy for rebalancing our economy. Whether the strategies elsewhere are as clear, I think is debatable, and the underlying data may not - at least at this stage don’t seem to be living up to the optimism in financial markets. Now they may change; maybe financial markets will be proved right.I think that in terms of equity prices - and indeed bond prices - the major factor pushing up prices has largely been the extraordinarily low level of interest rates which central banks have brought about and the statements about the intention to prolong that. And I think my concern about this is the link between the fact that in terms of its impact on growth, further monetary stimulus of a general kind is like running up an ever-steeper hill, and therefore what you're getting in terms of growth is not large at present, whereas the impact on financial market prices is clearly there. And the lower the yield, the higher the value of an asset price. And we do need to think about how we would cope with a
Clare Hutchison, Reuters:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013move back to what I would call normal levels of real interest rates, which are clearly significantly higher than they are at present.And this goes right to the heart of the paradox of policy, as I've called it, which is that we do need to get back to normal levels of interest rates so that a market economy can prosper again. But if we were to try to get back today, or this year, we would simply turn the economy down into a deeper recession. And trying to reconcile those two positions is the challenge of the paradox of policy. And it's proving exceptionally difficult, and I don't have an easy answer to it.But that's why I think - I stressed earlier on - that we do need now to recognise that there are limits to what might otherwise appear an attractive strategy of just trying to boost aggregate demand, in the belief that the reason aggregate demand is weak is because it's a temporary deviation from a fixed, long-run path, when in fact we are having to adjust for to a new path for domestic demand. And therefore we do need to take measures which would boost external demand and the supply side of the economy, to boost expected future incomes. And that real adjustment is fundamental to finding our way through this paradox of policy.Yesterday the G7 issued a statement reaffirming its commitment to market determined exchange rates. There were subsequently some comments from different G7 officials as to whether Japan was acting in line with this commitment. In your view is Japan acting appropriately?Well I'm not here to pass judgement on other economies, but I will say what the statement actually said, which was - there is a long standing G7 agreement that we will not engage in unilateral intervention; that we would only intervene in exchange markets in a concerted, collective way, when there was a disorderly market
Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013position, and in exceptional circumstances. And we've stuck to that.What that statement means is that, when countries take measures to use monetary stimulus to support growth in their economy, then there will be exchange rate consequences and they should be allowed to flow through.So the G7 statement is meant to underpin the world of floating exchange rates. And this is of fundamental importance, partly because I think it's rather unlikely that we're going to rebalance the world economy, given the current configuration of exchange rates, but also because in the short run if you want to allow countries to stimulate growth, you have to allow them to take the measures of a monetary or other kind which will have consequences for the exchange rate, and we should let floating exchange rates take them where they will.We don't intervene to offset the actions either of ourselves or of others, that's the G7 agreement.Now, you know when I put my name to that statement yesterday, I didn't expect that other so-called officials would be out there giving unattributable briefing both before and after the statement, trying to claim that the statement said what it didn't say. So the statement just says what it did say. And I've said to you what the longstanding G7 agreement has always been, and it's very important to allow exchange rates to move.Think back to the 1930s; think back to the early 1990s. It was the fixity of exchange rates that prevented countries from taking the monetary policy measures that were needed to stimulate their economies.
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013So if we go back to a world where we try to prevent exchange rates moving, then all we will succeed in doing is preventing countries from having the flexibility to take the measures that they need domestically. And we need a lot of countries now to take measures in order to stimulate demand in the world economy.You talked about things like the tuition fee rise being something of an own goal. Just to clarify, are you saying that the way the government has chosen to cut borrowing in some areas has made your job harder? And just related to that ...I don't think it's necessarily cutting borrowing, I think it's just general policies; whether it's on, you know, the finance of education, or green policies, or other policies, what they've done is to push up prices, and that clearly makes our job in the short run more difficult.But do you think that's something they should have borne in mind in thinking about their measures?Well I hope they did, but it's up to them to decide it. We will have to deal with the consequences, and what I've said is that we'll have to look through some of those price increases. Because I think it would be a mistake to allow unemployment to go up or to slow down the recovery in order to offset the inflationary consequences in the short run of those measures.But these measures are not ones just for one year; they're likely to continue for two or three years. And it is making our life more difficult.Just on the broader point you've said in your statement that the lesson - you were comparing it to 1993 but you were saying that the lesson of the last few years is that you can't rely only on the
Mervyn King:Jason Douglas, Dow Jones:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013Bank of England on monetary stimulus to support a recovery in the aftermath of a financial crisis. A lot of people were saying that in the summer of 2010. Looking back, do you think both the Bank and the government should have recognised that borrowing was going to have to play a bigger role in the next few years and growth was going to be slower in their forecasts?No, and the reason is because the key point I've been trying to get across this morning is that it's the path of total domestic spending that had to shift down to a new lower level - not just private spending, but public spending too. And the attempt to use stimulus of any kind to pretend that we might encourage people to get back to that higher original path was doomed to defeat. We are moving to a new equilibrium.There's no point trying to persuade people to spend in a way that they were spending before the crisis hit. It isn't just the sort of one-off, downward shock to demand that we can just put right by temporary policy stimulus, whether monetary or fiscal, and get back to the original path. We have to adjust to a new path, and that path is for the combination of private and public spending.So I think it's a deeper issue than that, and I think it's all about the need to shift to external demand and to the need to boost future incomes, raising productivity, to justify higher spending today.Governor, could you perhaps be a bit more specific on what kind of supply side reforms the MPC might think would be desirable, or if not, at least the sort of supply side problems that it's worried about are. You've described the problems in the banking system, but presumably there are other things as well that the MPC is concerned about?
Mervyn King:Tim Wallace, City AM:Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013Well I don't think it's for us to go into detail on what these reforms should be. There are a range of other people - there's the government, there's the Growth Commission from the LOC, there's Lord Heseltine's Commission - a whole range of people for whom it is their responsibility and their role to make these suggestions.All that we're saying is just a piece of analysis, which is that in the current circumstances the attempt to try to use conventional stimulus to raise aggregate demand, in the face of a situation where households know that they are moving to a lower path of domestic spending, both private and public, financed through tax revenues, is one where you need to recognise that you will be walking up an ever-steeper hill. You can do a little bit in the short run to bring spending forward from the future, but you do need to recognise the need to adjust to a new equilibrium. And that should colour the policy the prescription that you wish to follow.So it's not for us to get into detail about supply side reforms, but it is our role to try and point out that, in current circumstances, we have never been in a position where there's been a better time to engage in those supply side reforms - and that we don’t need to implement them immediately. What there has to be is a credible belief that expected future incomes will be higher because there is a path of such reforms.Governor, last week Vince Cable said that the Funding for Lending scheme was failing to help small businesses, and said that policymakers need to come up with new ideas to help firms at that end of the spectrum. Do you agree with that assessment, and what ideas would you put forward to help small businesses?Well let's give Charlie a chance to say something before he departs for Moscow to try and put things back in order.
Charlie Bean:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013Okay, there's quite a lot of material in the Report, at the end of the first section, discussing progress so far with the Funding for Lending Scheme, and it's summarised in a box on Page 17. I mean, the broad picture is that funding costs for banks have come down, which was the primary aim of the Scheme. I think it's important to realise that.The Scheme was not designed to favour particular types of lending, but it's structured in a way that encourages banks to lend more to the real economy as a whole than they would otherwise do, as well as reduce their overall funding costs. So they've been coming down.We've seen the terms that banks charge for loans falling, most obviously in the area of secured credit to households. There are also signs of increased availability of credit. We asked the banks whether they're making more credit available, and that's - there's quite a good chart on Page 14, 1.10, which illustrates the point that you're making, which is that - as far as corporates are concerned - there are signs of increased availability and lower spreads, which are the inverted dotted lines for medium and large companies; but only modest signs so far with respect to smaller companies.Now we always expected it to take longer to feed through to smaller companies. The terms offered to small businesses tend to be more bespoke. Also it needs the companies concerned to actually respond to the perception that credit is more available. But there are - you can point to particular instances where banks have been specifically declaring better terms for smaller enterprises.
Philip Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013So we are expecting to see something starting to come through in that side in due course. But it doesn't surprise us at this juncture that we haven't seen so much action there. And in terms of actually getting an increase in the supply of loans itself - that's the final stage - the bottom line in that table that I was referring to - that should start feeding through as we go through the course of this year.And with that, I will depart and catch my flight.You talked about the hill for monetary policy getting ever-steeper, I just wondered whether you think it's gone vertical yet and there is nothing more that can be done practically. And if it hasn't got vertical yet, what would decide that it has? I mean, how would you know that there wasn't nothing more that you could do and it was entirely up to fiscal stimulus to take the burden?It hasn't gone vertical; you can do more. The impact on demand may be less than was the case originally, but certainly you can do more. And the Committee has had long discussions about whether it should try to reduce overnight interest rates further, whether it should do more asset purchases. I think there was a lot of support on the Committee, the Committee was involved in discussing the Funding For Lending Scheme. All of these things we discuss on a regular basis.But I think what I'm trying to do this morning is to get across the principles behind the basic arguments we're using. And the fundamental challenge here is to rebalance an economy where there's been as big downward revision about the expected level of domestic spending that we can sustain.And that's not to do with adverse movements in the supply side at all; I mean I'm a supply side optimist. I'm more of a demand side
William Keegan, The Observer:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013pessimist because of the fact that domestic spending can't really go back to the path which it was on. And we will need to replace that with external demand, or we'll need to justify higher domestic spending by raising future productivity and expected future incomes.Mr Governor, Larry took us back to the 1990s; I’d like to go a little further back on the exchange rate. Way back in 1967 the pound was devalued famously, and it took a long time before it was seen to work. There was a lot of panic in the early years, and people talked about the J curve. Now you've mentioned that the devaluation has been more successful on trade - on trade books - than most people seem to think, but do you think that, given the extent of the devaluation - it’s a lot bigger than the one in the '60s ..... - there is still more to come and that the little J curve is long?Yes I do, and I think one of the reasons for that is that I think the data have been clouded a little by the impact of quite a sharp fall in financial services exports that reflected the banking crisis and the reduction in demand for financial services around the world. And that has made an apparent response to the fall in the exchange rate less big than it might otherwise have seemed.And I think, you know, what we’ve been trying to do - and I think this is perhaps the lesson from the '60s - was that the inflation targeting framework and an independent central bank have helped to create an environment in which domestic cost inflation has stayed low, and that's meant it possible for us to absorb temporarily the higher import prices of goods sold from abroad. We’ve been able to get the competitive benefits of the lower exchange rate without their being frittered away by higher domestically generated inflation, which was always the concern before.
Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013And indeed, I remember in the 1990s when packages were being discussed for many countries in the developing world, the IMF were always deeply worried about a devaluation because they thought the benefits would rapidly all be consumed by higher domestic inflation.Actually many of those countries too had moved to an inflation targeting framework, and by having, you know, sufficient monetary control to prevent domestic inflation from picking up, they didn’t fritter away the benefits of the devaluation and it did work.But one way or another, we clearly have to change the relative price of the goods that we produce at home, compared with those abroad, in order to persuade people to buy more from us and for us to be willing to buy less from overseas to improve the trade deficit and see that boost from external demand.So I mean, there are lessons from in the past, and you rightly point out that one of the challenges we face is that the scale of the depreciation that occurred was far bigger than any depreciation - it was the biggest depreciation since the Second World War. And yet we have managed to absorb this with money wage inflation, rock solid at 2% a year so far. And I think we should be grateful for that because that's helped make this a genuine improvement in our competitiveness.Guy Johnson, Bloomberg Television:You've talked again and again about the limits of what monetary policy can achieve. I'm just wondering if that's based on a beliefin your mind that expectations at the Treasury and the markets with the public are now too high about what monetary policy can achieve, particularly with the arrival of Mr Carney?
Mervyn King:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013Well as I say, this isn’t a statement about monetary policy as such. What I want to try and get across is that - don’t think about the instruments for the moment, think about the underlying equilibrium of the economy, and work out what has to happen. That's the point about the paradox of policy.We have to move to a different pattern of demand if we’re to get back to steady growth again, and that requires changes in relative prices, which we’re trying to absorb. We’re accommodating some of the temporary increase in inflation that's resulted from the lower exchange rate, but we’ve kept the lid on domestically generated inflation.But unless we get that switch in the pattern of spending, we won’t be able to get back to a stable growth path; you can’t just do it by boosting domestic spending again. And that's why monetary policy is proving less effective than it might have at the beginning. This isn’t, I stress that this isn’t just a one off downward shock through aggregate demand, where we can just expect it go away next year or the year after, with enough policy stimulus. This is a shift to a new path for the economy, and the policies have to be consistent with that.Now in the short run we can try to give some support to that process by using monetary policy but it’s only a temporary support and it won't be enough to get back, in and of its own, to that longer run path for the economy. That's why it needs to be not given up - we have a very large degree of monetary stimulus there and we’ll keep it there. So we’re not sort of giving up on monetary policy, but it has to be complemented by other policies, and those policies have to be not just boosting aggregate demand today; they have to be policies that are consistent with shifting to the new path of spending.
Mikio Sugeno, NikkeiMervyn King:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013I would like to ask your view as front runner of the inflation targeting since 20 years. We have just adopted an inflation target in Japan, and you will have a new colleague as Governor of the Bank of Japan soon. Our Prime Minister Abe pointed out that to achieve the inflation target it is a responsibility of the central banks, not the government. Do you share with his view or rather do you share with the view of the Mr Jens Weidmann so threat of the independence of the central bank? Thank you.In the long run, by pursuing the appropriate monetary policy, you can achieve the inflation target. But in the short run, and this is the problem that Japan is facing - Japan is facing an extreme example of the phenomenon I've described for the United Kingdom. The way in which a central bank would push up inflation, which is what Japan has set out to do now with the new target, is to ease monetary policy in the hope that this will expand spending, pushing up output growth and pushing up costs and prices.Actually it’s proved extraordinarily difficult for Japan to achieve that, despite zero interest rates for more than a decade, and despite fiscal policy which has been so expansionary that debt to GDP ratios are over 200%.So you’d have thought that actually the evidence was pretty clear that just trying to pursue boosting to domestic demand in the short run doesn’t enable you to push up inflation, if you have not tackled the underlying real problems and the shift to a new path. And I think Governor Shirakawa has been very clear on this, and he's been very clear on the fact that one of the big problems Japan had was not dealing with the banking system sufficiently decisively and sufficiently quickly. And that has been a handicap for a long while.
Nils Blythe:Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Sky News: Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013We’re starting to go round again, so if anybody who hasn’t asked a first question indicate.It’s just to go back to that question of the own goal that you were talking about - so regulatory administrative prices pushing up inflation. Isn’t that to some extent a failure of the Bank or indeed the inflation targeting system? Because clearly the aspiration is to, as you've said just a few moments ago, to create expectations, to stabilise expectations of price increases. And should the Bank not have been doing more behind the scenes to explain to regulators or to government that this is going to have a big inflationary effect? And do you not regret doing more behind the scenes to prevent this outcome where we are now?Well I mean, we didn’t know until the ONS published the figure that the tuition fees increase would actually raise CPI by 0.3 percentage points, not just this year but for the next two years.Was that not predicable?It wasn’t predictable because what we didn’t know and what the ONS were unable themselves probably to tell us until they done all the calculations, were the combination of students from domestic and overseas origins and the pattern of courses that they were taking. We made some estimates based on the best we could, and we had a lower figure. And this impact of tuition fees did come as a surprise in terms of its magnitude. And we also hadn’t expected I think that the impact of some of the charges that are leading utility companies to raise prices will persist for some considerable time.And this is, you know, these prices - these elements in the consumption basket; total expenditure on the commodities, energy and so on, that lie behind these administered prices,
Nils Blythe:Ben Chu, The Independent:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013count for only 16% of the total basket of consumer expenditure. Yet alone, they are going to add around a percentage point to inflation for the next couple of years or so.So the rest of the 84% basket, if inflation were to be a target, can only itself contribute one percentage point. That would be a pretty tight policy to run in these circumstances. So our judgement is that it makes sense to look through the administered and regulated prices, because there isn’t any sign that by doing that that domestically generated inflation is getting out of control.If we saw signs that inflation expectations were being dislodged in the long run or that domestically generated inflation was being dislodged, then of course we’d have to respond and we would then have to think carefully about what we would do.But I think it is sensible to look through these increases, and that is precisely you know how we interpret the inflation target. And we said that all the way through, at the very beginning of inflation targeting. Charlie gave speeches, Spencer was involved in writing speeches and giving talks, I gave speeches, in which we made very clear that supply side shocks are ones that we would regard differently from the demand side shocks.Now at that stage we didn’t have very many big supply side shocks to worry about. Now we have much bigger supply side shocks to worry about, and we are responding in exactly the way that we said we would 20 years ago.We are beginning to run out of time but let’s take a question from Ben.Governor, just to go back to the answer that you gave to Stephanie's question earlier where you seemed to suggest that it
Mervyn King:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013was obvious in 2010 that the economy was going to have to adjust to a new equilibrium of lower spending throughout the economy. If that was obvious, it wasn’t reflected in the MPCs forecasts which were for robust growth through that period.Obviously you've had the euro zone which has detracted somewhat, but probably not all. Isn’t it also fair to say that there's been a rather profound shift in the MPC's analysis of the capacity of the British economy to grow since then?No I don’t think it’s a change in the belief about the capacity to grow. I think certainly we’ve been surprised by the weak numbers for productivity and we don’t have a terribly compelling story to explain that. But I don’t think that's the narrative that we’ve driven our thinking on this.We always said there had to be a big rebalancing. After all, that was exactly the point in 2010, that you needed to reign in the path of domestic spending and allow it to create room for the external demand that would come in as a result of the weaker exchange rate, that would then allow us to rebalance. And all the way through I said rebalancing has been essential to all this.What we certainly hadn’t expected in 2010 was the worsening of the conditions in the euro area. Now you might have said we should have expected it; the underlying conditions were obviously adverse there. But market sentiment deteriorated a lot and that clearly impacted on real economic conditions there.And that, as our single biggest trading partner, impacted not just on us but on the rest of the world and the whole world economy has slowed down more, so that world demand has been a good deal weaker than we had expected.
Nils Blythe: Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News:Mervyn King:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013We also I think did not anticipate some of the increases in commodity prices that occurred in the two years following that, which squeezed real take home pay and led to a deeper squeeze in household consumption spending than we had anticipated. Those were the things that were unexpected about the two years that followed from the middle of 2010.But the underlying picture, which was the need to rebalance, was fundamental. And we had hoped that we would be able to rebalance faster, in which case the difficulty that monetary policy is now facing four years on, pretty much, from when we reached the bottom in 2009, would have been less evident because we would have rebalanced sooner. But given the failure of external demand to support the economy, and given the deeper squeeze on consumption spending that we had expected, we’re now in a position where you can see that it is actually harder and harder for monetary policy to push spending back up to the old path. And so the conflict between the need to rebalance and the ability to support the economy in the short run becomes more stark.We’re actually out of time but let’s take one last question. Scott.With the EU area and the US dealing with immediate risks of the debt crisis and the US fiscal cliff, is there a risk that the UK's fiscal problems and the economic weakness might come to the forefront of the minds of people in the markets, and Britain could lose its safe haven status this year? And would you actually welcome that if it meant a weaker pound?No. I mean I do not know what will be in the minds of people in the markets; I can’t predict that. All we can do is to set out very clearly our analysis, which we’ve done. There is enormous uncertainty out there. You refer to the changes which are being
Nils Blythe:ENDPage 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th February 2013made in the euro area and the United States; I think it goes well beyond that.So the big challenge - and the one which I hope we will have a chance to discuss in Moscow - is the fact that we keep talking about the need for the world economy to rebalance but actually we’re pretty ineffective in achieving that.And much of the reduction in the deficits that have occurred, the external deficit that's occurred since 2008, has been the consequence of a sharp fall in world activity and growth. And what we need to do is to find a way back to a better path for the world economy as a whole which has to imply some rebalancing if it’s to prove sustainable. And it’s how we can explain that and have a shared understanding of the way we’re going to get back to that new path which I hope will come out of the G20 in Moscow.Thank you and it only remains to me to thank you all very much indeed for coming.