Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 7th August 2013
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mark Carney:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013Can you tell us what statistical relationship there is between unemployment and inflation in the UK? In the US they use this sort of threshold, an unemployment threshold, where there is quite a stable relationship between the level of unemployment and the level of inflation. I've never heard anybody say there's a stable relationship of that sort in the UK, and I just wondered what evidence there is, academic or otherwise, to show that there is this sort of relationship.I'll take the start of that and then pass to Charlie.I think - let me put this in the broader context first, which is that there is a considerable margin of slack in the UK economy. The question is how big that margin of slack is. Most of the questions around that degree of slack actually relate to how much slack is in firms as opposed to how much slack is in the labour market.We have - currently productivity is about 15% below pre-crisis trends. It's not the judgement of the MPC that the scale of that gap is that large. But it is the judgement - the best collective judgement - of the MPC that there is a margin of slack, a margin of productivity that can be recovered as the economy recovers.Now - and we go through this in some detail in the accompanying report on Monetary Policy Trade-offs. That aspect would suggest that, in designing guidance, one would look at measures of productivity, a measure perhaps of an output gap that encapsulated that.The problem is - or the challenge is - that that's incredibly difficult to measure with precision. What we can measure with much greater precision, which is related and a good indicator of how much overall slack there is in the economy, is the unemployment rate. And so the judgement of the MPC was weighing up, in
Charlie Bean:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013designing guidance that would be appropriate for this set of circumstances, that would be appropriate given the productivity puzzle that I started to describe in the UK, was to use the unemployment rate which is readily understood, widely available, not subject to revisions and has a tighter relationship. But for academic and other statistical relationships, I defer to Charlie.Okay. I mean, Larry, I'm sure you're well aware of the pretty substantial literature on unemployment in the 1980s and 1990s. And one of the things that we learnt during that period, exactly as you say, there wasn't the simple relationship between the rates of wage inflation and unemployment. The standard view that emerged as a result of the work that took place in the eighties and nineties was that one had to allow for the equilibrium or natural rates of unemployment to move around.And it depends on lots of factors, things like the composition of the unemployed; you know, the long-term unemployed are less effective at finding jobs than those who've recently lost them. Obviously unemployment benefits, the structure of the labour market in general, matters. So we have a much better understanding of the drivers of the equilibrium unemployment rate these days.Now one of the interesting things I think about this downturn, although there have been lots of puzzles, particularly the productivity puzzle, actually the joint behaviour of pay growth and unemployment has not been particularly puzzling. That's been pretty stable. You have to allow for some increase in the natural rate of unemployment.There's a box on pages 28 and 29 of the Report which discusses our estimate of the equilibrium of unemployment rate in a little bit more detail. We think that it's sensible not to look at a very short
William Keegan, The Observer:Mark Carney:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013run measure of the equilibrium unemployment rate; there tends to be factors like terms of trade shocks which can have transient effects. It's better to look at a more medium term measure. That's given in the dotted maroon line in Chart A. We think that's about 6.5 at the moment. But as I say, call it the wage Phillips curve, has actually been behaving pretty well in this downturn.Mr Carney, the MPC is responsible for monetary policy. To what extent do you think the government's fiscal policy is inhibiting the reduction in unemployment that you so clearly seek?Well, a couple of things. First, what we seek is price stability as defined by the 2% inflation target. And the challenge for the MPC is to chart the best path back to that 2% inflation target, given the weakness in activity, given the slack in the labour market and given the initial conditions - given that we're starting with inflation at 2.9%. And we fully recognise that there has been a prolonged period where inflation has been above target.So we're balancing the need to get inflation back, and our primary responsibility of getting inflation back to the 2% target, with due consideration for output and employment. So, just to be absolutely clear, this is about us fulfilling our primary objective, which is inflation, and given the circumstances, doing it in a balanced way.And just to re-confirm why we're using a threshold. There are a variety of thresholds that we could have chosen. We could have chosen real growth; we could have chosen some nominal indicator, some nominal level; we could have chosen the employment ratio. We looked at a variety, and our analysis of that, or a summary of our analysis, is detailed in the document.
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mark Carney:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013In the end, what we're trying to do - and we landed on unemployment, not because it's a target - not because it's a target, but because it is the best summary indicator that gives a sense of the conditions at which - conditions in the economy at which the MPC would begin to consider the possible withdrawal of the exceptional monetary policy stimulus that's currently in place.And to go back to the previous question, we fully recognise that there's no one indicator that describes the economy; there's no one indicator that describes the state of the labour market. And we go at some lengths in both Reports to provide more detail on that.Governor, the first and third of your knockouts look fairly clear-cut. The second one seems a little bit fuzzy. How will the MPC decide whether inflation expectations are well anchored? I think at the moment five to ten year inflation expectations are around 3.5%, which is obviously significantly above target.Well, a couple of things. First, you're quoting a market rate for RPI inflation; our target is CPI inflation. I'm sure you're aware of the distinction; we certainly are.The Report provides a summary of work that the Bank has done previously on a range of indicators of inflation expectation, some of which are market indicators, a number of which are survey indicators and a number of which are the forecasts of analysts of medium-term inflation and longer-term inflation.We will look at all of those, as we always do. We've reproduced in summary form the range of indicators that we look at. We'll look at those as we always do. We'll look at them in a variety of ways. The view of members of the MPC is that, when looking at inflation expectation indicators, it's important to look not just at the level,
Guy Faulconbridge, Reuters:Mark Carney:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013but the change - the direction of change. It's important to look at sensitivity to news, for example, sensitivity of those indicators to actual outcomes on CPI, and to make judgements around that.Just to be absolutely clear, individual members of the MPC will be making - as they always do - but will be making their assessments - and they will be particularly important in this context - their assessments of the outlook for inflation, the probability that inflation could be above 2.5%, 18-24 month out - and we spell out how we calculate that.They'll be making those determinations each time we meet, as well as making a determination about whether inflation expectations remain sufficiently well anchored. So we're setting out the inputs to those decisions in the Report.There's much concern that the Help to Buy scheme may create a housing bubble in the UK. Do you share those concerns? And perhaps you could share with us your biggest worry about the UK economy, and whether you've lost any sleep over it? Thank you very much.Well, I think our biggest concern is, at this stage - and that over which we have over the most influence - our biggest concern is the possibility that, as the recovery gathers pace, that there is an unwarranted change in expectations about the pace of withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus.That is the point - that is one of the principal points of providing explicit forward guidance, so that people - whether they are market participants, but maybe most importantly whether they're running businesses - individuals across the country, they understand the conditions under which the MPC would begin to consider the withdrawal of stimulus.
Spencer Dale:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013And just to reiterate, that would begin to be under consideration once the unemployment rate hits 7%, the 7% threshold.With respect to Help to Buy and the housing market more generally, obviously it's something that we watch closely, not just in the conduct of monetary policy, which is the topic today, but in the Bank of England's broader responsibilities, therefore financial stability. We do watch it closely.I think we have to put recent developments in the housing market in context. We still see, for example, mortgage applications are well below historic averages; they're not yet at 60,000 - that's one of our key judgements is we expect them to move above 60,000. We see high loan to value loans - proportion of loans that are high loan to value, about 40%. Spencer, normally - pre-crisis they got up to about 70%, I think.Valuations are still quite a bit off. They've started to recover, but they're still quite a bit off, whether you measure them on a price to rent basis or relative to income.So the housing market is starting to recover, and actually the overall level of housing activity relative to GDP is a couple of percentage points lower than where it was prior to the crisis. So it needs to be put in context.And I think the last thing to put in context - actually, Spencer, I'll ask you for the exact figure, but Help to Buy relative to -Yeah. So, I mean, there's two components to Help to Buy which I think sometimes get muddled up. There's one which is the shared equity scheme, which is operating at the moment, and then there's the second one which is a mortgage guarantee
Sam Fleming, The Times:Mark Carney:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013scheme, which isn't yet operating and the details of which aren't yet known.In terms of the shared equity scheme, the main focus of that is on people buying new houses, and it's designed to encourage the building of new houses.I think it's my experience in driving round the country, that's working. I go and speak to house builders. They are building new houses, so that component's working. But it's important to keep the size of that component into some sort of perspective. So the current run rate of that is something like 3% or 4% of total housing transactions accounted for by the Help to Buy, the equity component.So I think it's doing its job in terms of encouraging new house builds, but the idea that it's somehow fuelling a housing boom I don't think really stacks up in terms of just the size of the numbers.Governor, first of all how much weight should firms and households be putting on this guidance, given the Bank of England has had quite a patchy forecasting track record in the past?And also, in the same context, the fact that the MPC itself will change its composition over the next few years. In fact we don't even know today how united the MPC is behind this particular policy.In terms of the weight, what we're doing is we're setting out very clearly the conditions under which the MPC would consider adjusting the current exceptional level of monetary policy stimulus.
Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013We have provided, if you want to wade through it, and Sam, I'm sure you will, specific sensitivities around what would the unemployment rate be, given various growth rates, average growth rates; the extent to which that growth is on the supply side, comes from productivity - we have those data tables. The degree of where the unemployment rate would be, given various growth rates. And participation rates as well - we've provided that analysis.So there's way to crosscheck the different ways the economy could get to 7%. And obviously individuals, firms, economic analysts, journalists, others can have different views about the outlook for the economy - it could be stronger or weaker than the MPC's view. I would note, I would re-emphasise, that we have significantly marked up our central tendency for the UK economy, both in terms of growth, with this forecast.And so people will have different views. That's entirely reasonable. What they should coalesce their views around - what this is giving an opportunity to focus those views on is the conditions under which the Monetary Policy Committee would intend to consider the possible withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus.Now we can't - in terms of the composition, the composition of the Monetary Policy Committee will change over time. And there is - again I'll speak in possibilities - there is certainly the possibility that there will be new members of that Committee before the threshold is reached. Those new members, as every member of the MPC is, will be independent, they will form their own views.
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mark Carney:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013The members of the Committee at present will form their views on both Bank Rate and asset purchases at each meeting, in the context of the guidance that we've given.But again, I'll just re-emphasise - if their outlook for inflation is above the inflation knockout, if their concerns - if they have concerns about whether inflation expectations are sufficiently well anchored, naturally it would follow they would judge that that guidance no longer applies, and that would influence.And I would just make one final point, which is that if the recovery were to falter, or if an individual member of the MPC had a view that additional stimulus were required, under this guidance they would be in a position - as they always would as an independent member - to support further asset purchases or other elements of a mixed strategy to ensure that we achieve our primary objective, which is price stability, while supporting output and activity - output and employment.Governor, you've spoken in the past about the importance of economies achieving escape velocity when emerging from recessions. Is it your view that the UK economy is now travelling at that speed? And if not, at what stage on these present forecasts do you think we will achieve that speed?Well, the short answer is no - we're not at escape velocity right now. The welcome news is that the economy is returning to levels of growth that could begin to be described as approaching historical averages - historical averages - after a prolonged period of very weak performance.The guidance provides a sense of the conditions under which we would start to judge - we being the MPC would start to judge whether, to use the terminology, whether the economy is at
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:Mark Carney:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013escape velocity, whether it is consistent with a sustainable recovery, and whether in the context of our primary objective, which is price stability, an adjustment of monetary policy is warranted.I wanted to see if you could talk a little bit more about the reasons behind the pick-up and your expectations for growth. It was a pretty big revision from May to August, and I wondered if you could talk about the extent to which you see the factors that are figuring in the pick-up now and the recent data as being sustainable. There's been a big consumer-led element to it, and as you know, wage growth hasn't been great. People have been dipping into their savings, so why further out should we see that the recovery has further traction to go?Well, there's a broad range of indicators that support the MPC's revised view, or updated view of growth in the UK economy. They range from softer indicators, survey indicators, whether it's the CIPS data, other indicators of business intentions, hiring intentions, to harder data - the recent manufacturing data, retail sales, data on the housing market, performance of the consumer during the period has to be said - during a period where there's some volatility because of shifting in time of compensation payments, some volatility in the savings rate that is there. But consumer confidence levels that have recovered significantly as well.So there's a variety of both hard and soft data, including I should add on our soft data our agents' surveys around the country, that are supportive of this revision.With respect to the consumer - and to be clear in terms of the components of growth going forward - obviously consumption largest share of the economy, household spending does play an
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mark Carney:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013important role. But we see that consumption growth is broadly in line with income growth. There is not embedded in this projection a material increase in our expectations - we do not expect a material increase in borrowing over the horizon, and we detail that in the Report.The recovery in housing activity from very low levels means that there is an important contribution from housing as well. And as you get farther out in the projection forecast horizon, we see business investment starting to pick up. As one would expect there's that lagged response on the business investment side.The BIS recently expressed a number of concerns about the long-term consequences of a prolonged period of negative real interest rates. Do you share those concerns?Well we share - we fully recognise that a prolonged period of low interest rates, could - if unattended, could lead to some financial vulnerabilities. And that's why we put in place the financial stability knockout, so that we use to the fullest the new institutional structure of the Bank of England, so that we get the benefit of the perspective and advice of the Financial Policy Committee.But, it's not necessary to have a financial stability knockout to address the types of issues to which you're alluding and the BIS was discussing. The FPC and the PRA spend, appropriately so - in fact the issues around so-called, 'low for long' interest rates are one of the top vulnerabilities that the Financial Policy Committee has identified for the UK economy and has gone through in some length at its most recent FSR.There is a variety of tools that can be used to address those. They start with supervision - effective supervision of institutions.
Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail:Mark Carney:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013They include the possibility of sectorial adjustments - Pillar 2 capital or other adjustments that could be brought into place. They would include a range of measures in markets as well, if necessary.The point is that there are several lines of defence, both in terms of microprudential supervision and regulation and macroprudential policy before one even gets to monetary policy. And I think the only change of emphasis I would, at least in the reporting of the BIS analysis, is to make the emphasis on using all of those lines of defence first, before the very blunt tool of monetary policy is used - or is considered to be used.Governor, how worried are you, or concerned are you, about the ability of the banking system to support this recovery? And might there be further movement on credit easing, Funding for Lending and so on to encourage lending, particularly to small businesses?Well the first thing, there are two parts to that answer, and I'll ask Paul if he has anything to supplement on Funding for Lending. The first is that there has been considerable progress made in recent years and in recent months on enhancing the resilience of the UK banking system. We have over 50 building societies that meet the leverage ratio now. We have virtually all the major banks that meet the leverage ratio, and the last remaining bank has put in place a credible plan to achieve that in a realistic timeframe.So the core capital position of the UK banking system is substantially improved. Also the risk profile of the system is substantially improved. And the consequence of that is that the ability to provide lending to the real economy has improved, and improved not just at this point in time, but importantly over the course of the forecast horizon. Because the one thing we know,
Paul Fisher:Claire Jones, Financial Times:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013we don't know exactly what shocks the UK economy will face over the course of the next three years, but undoubtedly we will face some shocks. And it's important not just to be there in the better times, but to be there when things get more challenging.In terms of - just to reiterate what I said earlier, in terms of the actual credit creation that underpins the economy, there is some, but it is not a return to the double-digit levels, by any stretch of the imagination, that we saw pre-crisis.Finally, in terms of Funding for Lending, I mean I'll ask Paul to speak to that, but I'll make the general comment that the Bank as a whole, and the MPC as appropriate, will continue to look at any sensible adjustments that can be made to any of our facilities within the context of our mandate, in order to appropriately support sustainable credit creation in this economy. Paul?I think we can say that when the Funding for Lending scheme was introduced just over a year ago the ability to raise funds and the costs of those funds was an issue potentially holding back credit growth. I think it's fairly safe to say that that is no longer the case. The big banks are certainly out there, saying themselves they have got plenty of funds to lend if they can find the right businesses to lend to. And the Report details the reduction in funding costs over the past year.So I think in terms of making sure that funding is not an obstacle to lending, the FLS has achieved that objective. There's still further to go in terms of seeing the amount of credit pick up, particularly to small businesses, but shortage of funding is no longer the problem.Governor Carney, how strong was the agreement among members of the MPC that unemployment was the right variable to
Mark Carney:Paul Wallace, The Economist:Mark Carney:Spencer Dale: Mark Carney:Michael Bird, City AM:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013use? And was the decision on guidance in this exact form unanimous?Well, as with any decision of the MPC, we don't comment until - the comment on specific individuals’ opinions, or on specific votes, comes out with the minutes; the minutes are coming out next Wednesday. So, you'll be the first to read them, I take it, given your interest.Given the first knockout, one interpretation of that would be that you've - or the MPC has temporarily raised the inflation target to 2.5%. Do you accept that? And doesn't that raise a concern about the credibility of the Bank of England's inflation fighting credentials?Absolutely not, there has been no change to the inflation target; the inflation target remains 2%. It applies at all times; the knockout reflects the initial conditions that were faced at this point in the recovery. Inflation is at 2.9%, the question is - what is the appropriate path to return that to the 2% inflation target?We've set a knockout and we've given the probability that the knockout, in our best judgement, that that knockout would be triggered given where we are today, which is roughly around 40% and that's detailed in one of the charts, I can't remember ...Chart 4, Page 8.Chart 4, Page 8, thank you. So this is about the right path to bring inflation back to target while supporting output and activity.There have been suggestions that the jobs emerging since the crisis are lower paid and less stable than a lot of the ones they replaced. If that indicates that households might still be
Mark Carney:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013deleveraging and uncertain, is the composition of new employment something the MPC will be considering alongside the headline rate of unemployment?Well, without question we have to consider a range of indicators and we always consider a range of indicators in formulating monetary policy. We have, for simplicity, and for clarity, we have chosen a specific labour market indicator, the unemployment rate, as our threshold condition.But without question when assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, we look at a wide range of indicators. And specifically to your question, the members of the MPC are well aware in setting policy that the number of part time jobs has increased by more than two percentage points as a proportion of overall jobs, that average hours worked, while it has been relatively strong, as many labour market indicators have been, given the scale of the recession and the weakness of the recovery, average hours worked is not yet back to pre-crisis levels. Total hours worked actually are back to pre-crisis levels.So we look at a range of indicators in terms of assessing the stance of the labour market. And just again, as a bit of a guide, we provide a lovely spider diagram in the document which gives you a sense of where things are.The one thing I would take from that actually is that in terms of - and this diagram gives you a sense of the standard deviation from its longer run averages - that actually most labour market indicators are relatively - are sending relatively similar signals in terms of the degree of slack in the labour market. In other words there is slack in the labour market across things, but we will watch all elements closely.
Philip Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mark Carney:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013There's been a lot of pressure for - a lot of stress on the rebalancing of the economy and this commitment that rates will be low, 0.5 for potentially three years, you could argue that that is a case for encouraging an unbalanced recovery. And alongside that, I just wondered if you could give us an idea of what FPC knockouts - give us some examples of an FPC knockout?So are you concerned about the unbalanced economy, Governor?Well, without question. I mean the Bank and the MPC have long been focused on this issue of rebalancing, and it's part of ensuring a sustainable recovery. Let's be clear, there's a few aspects to rebalancing: there's the process of deleveraging of households and financial institutions.There has been progress on that front. Household debt to income has fallen by more than 20 percentage points, financial institutions have raised considerable capital, they have de-risked their businesses to some extent as well. So there has been progress. There's also obviously the rebalancing that's necessary on the fiscal side, which is in train.In terms of the other element though - and it's very much related in terms of the overall level of the balance of savings and investment in the economy - is on the external side. And in a global economy that remains relatively weak, actually Charlie I think I'll ask you to supplement this, but in a global economy that remains relatively weak, and certainly with our largest trading partner which, despite some recent improvements, is still moving sideways - meaning Europe, the path to sustainable rebalancing is to increase productivity.
Charlie Bean:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013And one of the advantages of the approach that we're taking - there's little monetary policy can directly do to influence productivity, but one of the advantages in terms of setting this guidance, this threshold base guidance, is that it allows us to test the degree to which productivity will recover alongside demand.And by helping to spur demand, we test that and there is a dynamic aspect to this guidance, if we see more of demand being met by supply, all other things being equal, that means that it will take longer to achieve the threshold which will mean more stimulus over that time. But Charlie do you want to talk about broad ...Well I mean it's no secret that the MPC would like to have seen rebalancing in the form of an increase in the share of net trade and also ideally an increase in investment. But the fact is that achieving that against the background of a depressed global economy, particularly our key export markets, the eurozone, that's not a particularly propitious backdrop.Now the decline in the exchange rate that we had in 2007/8 should have gone some way towards helping that and indeed if you look at exports of goods that has indeed been boosted by the exchange rate depreciation. But unfortunately at the same time we found ourselves being subject to essentially - think of it as a loss in comparative advantage in financial and business services, probably brought on by the financial crisis. So that the contribution from that sector has been less than we would have hoped.Now as we go forward, hopefully as we start seeing the rest of the world picking up, we will see a stronger contribution from net trade. As far as investment goes, you can't expect businesses to be increasing investment against the backdrop of relatively weak
Tessa Chapman, 5 News:Mark Carney:Ed Conway, Sky News:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013demand for their products. So to some extent you need also some pick-up in domestic demand, to expect to see some pick up in business investment.We do expect to see a pick-up in construction investment, housing investment in particular, and going back to an earlier question that's one of the factors behind the recovery in momentum in growth in the near term. And that's clearly something that is good for the economy; we need more houses. But the pick-up in business investment comes further down the road as the recovery appears more entrenched.Today's strategy clearly needs to be communicated to a wide audience, what's the message that you want ordinary businesses and ordinary people to hear today?The message is that the MPC is going to maintain the exceptional monetary policy stimulus until unemployment reaches a 7% threshold, at which point we will reconsider. That means, if nobody else enters the labour force, that means a quarter of a million jobs. Under a normal period of labour force growth over the three-year horizon, that means three quarters of a million more jobs, if the same participation rate is there.The second message is that we will do this while maintaining price and financial stability. So we'll do this in a fashion that respects our primary responsibility for price stability and our secondary responsibility for financial stability. And the combination of that is to secure a sustainable recovery.Governor you say in your commitment to forward guidance that this shouldn’t rule out future asset purchases necessarily, but you’re not necessarily saying all that much in the report about what those purchases might be, the particular type of quantitative
Mark Carney:Louise Scrivens, World Business Press:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013easing. And I'm just curious to press you on whether you feel that the particular breed of QE that the Bank of England has followed in the past, so buying up government bonds, is necessarily the best form of asset purchases for the future and whether you would support something like that?Well this is the policy that we have at present, the strategy we have at present, which is the adoption of this threshold base forward guidance which includes obviously Bank Rate at 0.5%, the existing stock of asset purchases that's in place, the £375bn, and taking into account Funding for Lending and other things that the Bank has put in place to strengthen the banking system. In the MPC’s judgement that's the appropriate stance of monetary policy to achieve the inflation target and to help secure the recovery.So it’s not a question for today about considering additional measures. That's only a question that would be addressed in - and it is a question we will always ask ourselves appropriately at subsequent meetings, just as we will ask ourselves the questions of whether the knockouts have not yet been breached, or whether or not the knockouts have been breached.So I think it would be inappropriate for me to speculate on what we might or might do under future hypotheticals. And in any event, I would only be one of nine individuals who would be making those determinations.I was going to ask a similar question, but just to expand on what might trigger more quantitative easing and what could lead the Bank of England to begin selling gilts back to the markets. And also if you've considered buying commercial assets as well.
Mark Carney:Paul Fisher:Helia Ebrahimi, CNBC:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013Well, given the similarity of the question, I'm afraid I'm going to refer to my earlier answer in terms of - I just don’t think it’s constructive to - and it wouldn’t be appropriate to speculate on different policies. We’ve made a decision, we’ve adopted this strategy, this is the appropriate stance of monetary policy in the MPC’s judgement for this point in time to help secure the recovery.With respect to one of your questions that was embedded in there, I’ll just turn to Paul in terms of restating our views on asset sales when the point comes in time, but I would say - just as a preview of that - that our approach here very much reinforces that view because we have committed to reinvest all of the proceeds of maturing, all the cash flows associated with maturing gilts, during the period of time during which the forward guidance is in place.So on asset sales, what we have said is that we would only commence asset sales at a time when we thought we could do it over a sustained period of time in order to keep an orderly debt market. The presumptive plan currently is that we will raise interest rates before we would start asset sales, but that's not a commitment, that's just the planning that we’ve got for now.What we won’t want to do is use asset sales as an active instrument where we buy some one month, sell some the next. When we get into asset sales, it will be because we want to do it over a sustained period of time in an orderly fashion.Thank you, Governor. You touched on it briefly but can I just ask you how you view the eurozone risk? In the report you said domestic recovery continues to emanate from abroad, and you refer to the eurozone. Has that gotten better? Has it subsided?
Mark Carney:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013There has been, over the course of the last year, there has been important progress, and there remains important work in progress, in the eurozone to construct a sustainable monetary union and to enhance the potential of the European economy. There has been progress on banking union. The Recovery and Resolution Directive which also applies here is something we very much welcome and support. The upcoming Asset Quality Review by the ECB will be important in further enhancing and reinforcing the resilience of the European banking system, it’s absolutely essential.A variety of structural reforms on the national level have, to varying degrees, been put in place. And the monetary measures of the ECB have very much helped to contain both tail risks, and to the extent possible in a financial system that is still quite fragmented, to the extent possible have done much to support output in the context of their price stability mandate.But we should not get ahead of ourselves in terms of expectations for the eurozone. There remain risks. Senior European authorities and political figures are well aware of these risks; they’re working hard to try to minimise them but there remain risks. And in fact in our forecast we don’t fully include the most extreme risks that could emanate from the eurozone in constructing our forecasts.And then the last point I’ll make is that it well the eurozone economy has stabilised and is beginning to pick up slightly. In order to gain significant exports into Europe, British firms will need to continue, will really need to build their competitiveness by investing and improving productivity, because it’s not going to be driven by very strong demand pull, in our best judgement.
Hugh Pym, BBC News:Mark Carney:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013Governor, what do you say to those who say, well indicators in the last few days about UK growth have been pretty positive; you yourselves have revised up your growth forecast for this year and next year to a pretty healthy looking 2.7%? You’ve already successfully persuaded the markets that a rate rise is going to be some way in the future. What’s wrong with the existing stance? Why did you need to bind your hands by doing more?Well a couple of things. First, the last bit of your comment, question - to be absolutely clear that with the combination of the thresholds and the knockouts, hands are not bound here. What the MPC is doing is it’s providing much greater clarity about how we would react to underlying economic conditions, how we’d set monetary policy.But to go to the big part of your question is why now? This is exactly the time when something like this is appropriate. We are at the start of a renewed recovery. As I said in my opening comments, this is very welcome, but it’s after a very long period of - it’s after a very sharp recession and a very long period of very weak activity. This is the weakest recovery on record; records go back over a century. Let’s put it in context. There is significant slack in this economy and there is, to some extent, in the relief about the recovery there is an understandable - expectation can build up, that that immediately means pulling back on the exceptional monetary stimulus which is really at the heart of helping to get the recovery going.And what the MPC is saying here is that we need to make further progress, and we need to reach certain thresholds – a threshold - at a minimum that threshold before we consider pulling back. And we’re doing it in a way again that fully takes regard of our responsibilities on price and financial stability.
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mark Carney:Nils Blythe:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013Governor, just for clarity’s sake, is this basically a clarification of communication, kind of designed as a beacon to the great British public to increase their demand for credit and for money which has been lacking? Or is it actually a loosening of policy?First and foremost it is a clarification. What this does is make stimulus more effective. We have exceptional monetary policy stimulus in place; this is about making that monetary policy stimulus more effective. It does that in three ways. It provides greater clarity about what we’re trying to achieve, what’s the path. Everyone knows we have a 2% inflation target, what’s the path that we think, the MPC thinks, is best for the economy in terms of returning inflation to 2% while supporting, to the extent possible, activity and employment.The second thing is it reduces uncertainty. My response to Hugh Pym just now, just referenced that. It reduces uncertainty because there can be a premature view of a premature withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus as the recovery starts to build up.And the third point, which is maybe the most subtle, is that this provides a robust framework in order to test how much excess supply there is in the economy, not just within the labour market but within firms. And it’s a robust framework because it has with it those price - two price and one financial stability knockouts, which disciplines the framework as a whole, as we test to see how supply comes on as the economy recovers. It’s more effective.We’re almost out of time but we’ve had a bunch of people over on this side who have had their hands up for a long time. Richard, quick question.
Richard:Mark Carney:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013Governor, this is still quite complex guidance. You've got the three knockouts; you've got this handy 44 page booklet explaining your thinking. Is one to understand that it’s your intention to give somebody making a big decision on borrowing that interest rates, by your best estimate, are likely to stay where they are until the middle or late 2016?This is, if you look at page 7 of the Inflation Report for what it’s worth, on the top half of the page it tells you everything you need to know, Richard. And I can read it to you later if you’d like me to.What the MPC is doing is giving a sense of the economic conditions that would have to be achieved before we consider - consider - starting to withdraw the exceptional monetary policy stimulus that's in place. Not a point in time, but the economic conditions. And that economic conditions is one, it’s one. It’s the unemployment rate. Everyone knows what the - everyone in this room knows what the unemployment rate is. The unemployment rate is reported monthly; everyone can understand what the concept is. Unfortunately a lot of us know people who are unemployed or just become employed. It is something that's real, it’s tangible, it’s widely understood, it doesn’t get revised, or if it’s revised these are minimal revisions. And so for a business, for an individual, you have a pretty good sense of where it is.Now furthermore, we provided our best view on where unemployment is going to be. We have for the first time published our forecast - the MPC’s forecast of unemployment. In this case, today, we have published a forecast that's conditioned on Bank Rate remaining constant for the next three years and asset purchases remaining at the £375bn level over that course in time.
Guy Johnson, Bloomberg Television:Mark Carney:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013And our median unemployment is 7.3%, our view in terms of the probabilities is that - and we provided a probability chart - is that it’s as likely that we’ll meet that 7% threshold by the end of the forecast horizon as it is before.And let me just add one other thing which I should to Faisal’s question earlier, which is that our view - so we’re not providing a view in time, we’re providing a view of those underlying conditions. If you take that together and you map that towards where market interest rates are, our best collective judgement is that the current market curve at the time we produced this was less likely to be realised over time, given that outlook for economic conditions. But this is about an unemployment threshold. Different individuals will have different views on when that's going to be achieved. And on the basis of forming those opinions they can infer, not just infer, they can understand what the Bank would do, will do rather.Governor there has been a huge degree of correlation between major global bond markets over the last few years. There's some evidence that that's breaking down. Would you expect that to continue to continue to break down or do you think that once the Fed starts seriously tapering, tightening, that the gravitational effect will simply be too great for the gilt market to resist?Well the first thing is that there has been a huge degree of correlation, as you know, across all asset prices. You know, risk on, risk off correlations, whether it’s major commodities and the S&P 500, whether it’s credit spreads, whether it’s global bond markets, certain currency pairs, correlations that previously would have been 0.3, 0.25 something like that, all in the 0.75, 0.8 level.
Nils Blythe:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013And it only has been in the first part of this year that those very high correlations, both across asset classes and within asset classes, started to return to something like pre-Lehman levels. That's a good thing because that's - we’re out of the huge macro tail risk world where you have the possibility of major events, the small probabilities of major, very bad events influencing the course of asset prices.Now in that context, between the major advanced economy bond markets, even in a more normal environment one can expect a relatively high correlation of yields - longer term yields, and I make the import on longer-term yields - because these high quality credits are relatively good substitutes for each other. I think it’s a point that we make in the actual Report, in the trade-off Guidance Report.What is important though is to recognise that different major economies, advanced economies, are at different points in their economic cycles. They have different outlooks for inflation. There will be different stances of monetary policy; there will be different timings that are appropriate of exit, beginnings of exit, from exceptionally stimulative monetary policy. And what we saw a few months ago in June was that there was much less differentiation at the shorter end of the curve between the major short rate curves than would have been warranted by the different positions that they are in.That’s one of the advantages of guidance in this context. It’s giving a better sense, to use the technical term, of the MPC’s reaction function. It’s not a change in the reaction function, but it gives a better sense of the MPC’s reaction function to financial market participants.We’re way over time but a very quick question, Simon.
Simon Nixon, Wall Street Journal:Mark Carney:Nils Blythe:ENDPage 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 7th August 2013I’ll be very quick. Governor there are some city economists who are forecasting that house prices might rise by 15% in the next year. Would you regard that as success for this policy?The success for - the Bank of England judges, sorry be more specific, the MPC judges success in achieving - by achieving the inflation target, the 2% inflation target. That is our primary objective. The issue we face today is the speed with which we return to that 2% objective and in a manner that - to the extent possible - supports output and activity. We don’t target asset prices. We focus on CPI inflation and getting there at the right period of time.Within the broader Bank of England, within the broader set of responsibilities of the Bank of England, there are both prudential regulators - the PRA, macroprudential authorities - the FPC, who take an intense interest in scenarios such as the one you just described and the implications for sustainability. But that's why there is that division of responsibility. Thank you.I'm afraid that really is all we’ve got time for, so thank you all very much indeed for coming.