INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 15 May 2013 Opening Remarks by the GovernorCentral banks are all about stability. But the past twenty years or so has been a time of almost continuous revolution – more in the style of that most famous of all central bank governors, Che Guevara, than in the traditions of the Bank of England. Collapse of the ERM, inflation targeting, central bank independence, a banking crisis at home and crises galore abroad, new responsibilities for the Bank; all reflect an extraordinary period of change.And the change continues. Of most significance today is that there is a welcome change in the economic outlook. Today’s projections are for growth to be a little stronger and inflation a little weaker than we expected three months ago. That is the first time I have been able to say that since before the financial crisis. But this is no time to be complacent – we must press on to ensure a recovery and bring down unemployment.Since we last met in February, there have been two important developments that bear on today’s Report. One is that in response to the Stockton Review of the MPC’s forecasting capability, we have implemented a number of changes to the Report, some of which I will describe later.The second is that, in the March Budget, the Monetary Policy Committee was given a new remit. That reaffirms the MPC’s primary objective of a target for CPI inflation of 2%, and the Committee welcomes the end to any uncertainty about the objective of monetary policy.	The remit also requires us to explain more fully our thinking when exercising our constrained discretion over the short-run trade-off between growth and inflation. At present, such a trade-off arises because inflation remains stubbornly above target while there remains a significant margin of spare capacity, especially, as we saw in today’s data release, in the labour market.That combination of above-target inflation and depressed output has characterised the economic landscape since 2008, reflecting the lingering impact of the banking crisis, the subsequent fall in
2sterling, and increases in commodity prices. Our economy still faces the challenge of a substantial rebalancing following the abrupt reassessment of future incomes and spending opportunities triggered by the crisis.	This hasn’t been a typical recession, and it won’t be a typical recovery.Nevertheless, a recovery is in sight. Output grew by 0.3% in the first quarter and growth is likely to strengthen over the course of the year. The Committee’s overall judgement about the outlook for four- quarter GDP growth is summarised in Chart 1 on page 6 of the Report. You will notice that there are fewer bands in the fan chart than in previous Reports – each pair of bands now covers 30% of the probability distribution, rather than 10%. That change, prompted by the Stockton Review, helps to convey the broad shape of the distribution rather than its precise contours. The more detailed underlying distribution can be found on our website and in the chart pack you have been given.As usual, the projection is based on the assumptions that Bank Rate follows a path implied by market interest rates, and that the size of the Bank’s asset purchase programme remains at £375 billion. Both demand and effective supply look set to pick up gradually over the next year or so, supported by past asset purchases, a further easing in credit conditions helped by the extension of the Funding for Lending Scheme, and the gradual ending of the adjustment of household and business spending triggered by the financial crisis. But the hangover from that adjustment and the associated rebalancing means that the recovery is likely to remain weak by historical standards. The main downside risk to the sustainability of the recovery continues to stem from events overseas, especially in the euro area.CPI inflation was 2.8% in March, and has remained above the 2% target for most of the past five years, pushed up by VAT, energy and import prices. But over the same period, the GDP deflator – a measure of domestic price pressures in the whole economy – has risen at a lower rate of very close to 2% a year. Increases in university tuition fees and domestic energy bills, largely resulting from administrative decisions rather than market forces, have added to CPI inflation recently. These and other administered and regulated prices contributed around one percentage point to inflation at the end of last year, more than double the historical average. They are likely to push up on inflation over much of the forecast period, making the challenge of bringing CPI inflation back to 2% more difficult, even if other domestic price pressures are contained.
3The Committee’s best collective judgement of the outlook for CPI inflation is summarised in Chart 3, on page 7 of the Report. It is based on the same assumptions about monetary policy as Chart 1. Inflation is likely to remain above the 2% target for some time as the contribution from administered and regulated prices persists over the next two to three years. Nevertheless, despite that persistence, weak private sector wage growth (evident in today’s data) and fading external price pressures, together with anchored medium-term inflation expectations, mean that inflation should gradually fall back towards, and perhaps below, the target over the forecast period.In response to the requirement in our remit to promote understanding of the short-run trade-off facing monetary policy there is an extended discussion of this issue in Section 5 of the Report. There are a number of other changes to the Report, stemming from the Stockton Review. Table 5.A lists the main indicators that we will use in assessing whether the key judgements underlying our forecast are being borne out by events. We are also publishing extra information, alongside the Report, on our website. That includes the numbers underlying the forecast distribution, and a pack of charts and tables which goes beyond those in Section 5. A box on page 49 covers recent and prospective changes to the Report in more detail. I am sure the Inflation Report will continue to embrace change, and remain a leading example of central bank transparency around the world.Transparency means giving reasons for policy actions. Over the years, we have tried to act as a consistent monetary referee, responding to the unpredictable behaviour of the players. When that behaviour was itself extraordinary, we had to take extraordinary action to support growth and employment. Bank Rate has been at a record low for over four years; we have purchased assets worth 25% of GDP; our balance sheet has expanded by a factor of five; and the Funding for Lending Scheme has been launched and now extended. Looking ahead, markets expect Bank Rate to remain below 1% for a further four years – although of course its actual path will depend upon economic circumstances which no-one can predict.Nevertheless, with inflation still high and spare capacity remaining, monetary policy continues to perform a difficult balancing act. Attempting to return inflation to target too rapidly would result in even slower growth and higher unemployment. That in turn would risk eroding the medium-term supply capacity of the economy. But allowing inflation to stay high for too long could cause households and businesses to begin to doubt the MPC’s commitment to meeting the inflation target, putting at risk medium-term price
4 stability. Our job is to strike the appropriate balance between these risks.Monetary policy alone, however, cannot solve all our problems. There are limits to what can be achieved by general monetary stimulus – in any form. If we are to see a return to sustained growth, not only the UK economy, but the world economy as a whole, must find a way to a new equilibrium in which there is a rebalancing of world demand. Those are not challenges that can be resolved by monetary policy alone, nor can they be resolved by any one country alone, as we recognised in the G7 discussions at the weekend.As a result, the challenges facing central banks are as great as they have ever been. In many ways, the most durable lesson of the past twenty years is the overriding importance of basing monetary policy on serious economic analysis, rather than politics or market mystique. Although there will always be room for differences of view, putting economic analysis to the fore has raised the level of economic debate in this country – in which you all have played a major part – and has, I hope, raised the quality of policy itself.But after 89 press conferences, including 82 under the banner of the Inflation Report, I have had my say. Now it is over to the next generation to have theirs.