INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 13 February 2008 Opening Remarks by the GovernorTwo key developments shape the MPC’s latest projections. First, tighter credit conditions for households and businesses will bear down on demand both in the United Kingdom and abroad. Second, rising energy, food and import prices will push up on inflation.Both developments are now more acute than in November. And as a result, the near-term outlook in today’s Report is one of inflation rising sharply alongside a marked slowing in growth. The Committee’s aim is to bring inflation back to the 2% target in the medium term. But in doing so, it faces a difficult balancing act.The process of re-pricing risk in global financial markets has continued. Equity prices have fallen sharply – the FTSE All Share Index by 11.5% since November. And as banks in the major financial centres adjust their balance sheets, credit conditions faced by households and businesses have tightened further, as revealed by the Bank of England’s Credit Conditions Survey.The impact of tighter credit conditions is apparent in property markets, and is particularly likely to affect investment in commercial and residential property and perhaps business investment more generally. The household saving rate is likely to rise, slowing the growth rate of consumer spending, signs of which are already evident in official and survey data of retail sales.As I explained in my speech in Bristol last month, the adjustment we are experiencing is part of a long- run rebalancing of the world economy that, in the United Kingdom, will mean some shift in total demand, away from spending and importing, towards exporting. That process will be supported by the 6% fall in sterling’s effective exchange rate over the past three months, which will help to offset the weaker outlook for the world economy. But the fall in sterling will also put upward pressure on import prices and moderate the growth of real disposable incomes.
2The Committee’s latest projection for GDP growth is shown in Chart 1 (CHART 1 – GREEN) on page 7 of today’s Report. The projection is based on the assumption that Bank Rate moves in line with market expectations, which have fallen substantially since November. In the near term, growth slows sharply, primarily as a higher personal saving rate and rising energy and import prices dampen consumer spending, but also as business investment moderates. Growth then begins to recover as the effects of lower interest rates and the fall in sterling work through. The profile is somewhat weaker than in November. In the Committee’s judgement, the potential for further falls in asset prices and tightening of credit conditions means that the balance of risks around the central projection is on the downside, particularly over the next eighteen months.The Committee’s latest projection for CPI inflation is shown in Chart 2 (CHART 2 – RED) on page 7 of the Report, again on the assumption that Bank Rate follows the path implied by market yields. In the central projection, inflation rises sharply from 2.2% in January to around the level at which I would be required to write an open letter to the Chancellor. The profile is significantly higher than in November, reflecting the recent announcements of increases in household gas and electricity bills as well as rising import prices. The impact of rising energy and import prices is already apparent in businesses’ input costs, which are rising at their fastest rate for more than a quarter of a century.As food, energy and import prices stabilise, inflation should start to fall back towards the target. The challenge for the MPC is to balance two conflicting risks to the medium-term outlook. On the downside, a sharper slowing in activity would threaten to pull inflation below the target. On the upside, if the central projection were to materialise then, by the end of this year, inflation will have been at or above target in all but 5 months in 3 years. In those circumstances, keeping inflation expectations anchored firmly on the 2% target could not be taken for granted. In the Committee’s judgement some slowing of demand growth, by reducing pressure on capacity, is likely to be necessary to bring inflation back to the target in the medium term.The balance of those risks will depend on the stance of monetary policy. In the Committee’s judgement, if Bank Rate follows the path implied by market yields, CPI inflation is, in the medium term, more likely to be above the target than below. But Chart 3 (CHART 3 – RED) on page 8 of the Report shows the projection for CPI inflation assuming that Bank Rate remains unchanged at 5.25%.
3Under that assumption, the Committee judges that inflation is more likely to be below the 2% target than above. The Committee will be monitoring the risks closely and constantly updating its assessment.It is important to remember what monetary policy can and cannot achieve. The changes we are seeing in financial markets are one aspect of a wider shift in the world economy as some of the imbalances unwind. Changes to risk premia, asset prices and exchange rates are all part of the necessary adjustment. Monetary policy neither can nor should try to reverse these changes in relative prices. But, although the Monetary Policy Committee cannot deliver a completely steady path for output growth, it will take into account the implications of changes in financial conditions for demand, and hence, inflation. And it is the outlook for inflation in the medium term on which the Monetary Policy Committee remains focussed.