WORLD TELEVISIONBank of EnglandInflation Report Press Conference Wednesday 13 February 2008Transcript by: Angela King, on behalf ofWords, 274 Carr Road, Northolt, UB5 4RH Phone: 020 7871 7329 eMail: angelaking.words@gmail.com
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:David Smith:Page 2 Inflation Report Press ConferenceThere seems to be a more pronounced difference between the inflation projections on the constant and market rate assumptions than on the growth projections, which don't seem to be that markedly different. Is that just a trick of the light or is there something else happening there?I mean obviously there is a bigger movement in the inflation projection, because that is the result not just of likely paths in demand over the next two to three years, but also the impact of these large short run boosts to inflation through one­off changes in energy prices, particularly the gas and electricity domestic prices.So that may give you more of an impression, but I don't think it's a genuine reflection of the differences in inflation that are generated by differences in paths of demand; so that the two paths of interest rates ­ which are quite markedly different, clearly ­ and that's illustrated quite well by the chart on page 9, which shows the change in market rate expectations between August and November and then November and now. And you can see that between November and now there's been a big fall in the yield curve ­ that's the big change over the past quarter. But the November line is much closer to constant rates at the current rate. So there's quite a big difference in interest rates implied there. That does have an impact on the demand profile, and in turn that has an impact on the inflation profile.But I don't think there's any reason to suppose that the transmission mechanism we're assuming is any different between the two paths of the interest rates, no.It's not that monetary policy has lost some of its power because of the credit crisis?
Mervyn King:William Keegan, Observer:Mervyn King:Page 3 Inflation Report Press ConferenceNo, I mean we are clearly assuming ­ as we did in November ­ that some of the compression of spreads, particularly in the mortgage market, that occurred in the two to three years running up to last autumn, will actually expand and unwind. And indeed much of that's already occurred. It's not something that you expect to see largely in the future. We've already seen a significant widening of margins in that market. And that will be true generally in credit markets as less competition, as concerns about the size of balance sheet of lenders, lead them to try to recuperate capital by holding back on lending and raising the terms, the margins relative to bank rate at which they're prepared to lend.But there's no judgement here that monetary policy is less potent, no.Given the importance you place in rebalancing on exports, would you endorse or at least sympathise with the calls from the managing director of the International Monetary Fund for greater international economic policy co­ordination, and in particular for where possible the stimulus of fiscal policy in other countries?Well let me not endorse or not endorse particular words that Dominique Strauss­Kahn used. I would say two things. One, I certainly think that the Fund itself has a very important role to play in trying to get countries to talk to each other about the economic strategy that they are pursuing, both monetary, fiscal and financial. That's something that I've talked about in other speeches, and I think the main role of the IMF now is in the area of surveillance, and I can't think of a more important time when that role is required than now.
Page 4 Inflation Report Press ConferenceSo I very much hope ­ and indeed I believe ­ he will push that very hard. And I think he's already made an extremely impressive start at the Fund.The second thing I would say is that what we need is a recognition that, if the world economy is not to slow sharply, then a significant slowing of domestic demand in countries like the United States will need to be matched by somewhat stronger domestic demand in other parts of the world. And in large part that's Asia.Now I think the Asian economies are conscious of that, and there is no reason why they can't maintain and if necessary expand the growth rate of their domestic demand. The strategy which China has already publicised for the next ten years is a strategy of relying less on external demand and more on domestic demand.Of course it's difficult to ensure that the timing means a smooth transition as the world economy rebalances, with domestic demand shifting more towards the East from the West. And that's why I think we simply have to understand and accept that we can't guarantee the world economy would always grow at a completely steady rate.But that is the virtue of international discussions of the macro economic position ­ is to try to ensure that people do understand what each other is likely to do and can set their own domestic policies accordingly.I don't think it follows from this that this is an argument for significant fiscal expansion everywhere, because in many ways that might impede the rebalancing. In many ways it would be easier if interest rates leading to changes in relative exchange
Emma Charlton, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Emma Charlton. Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 5 Inflation Report Press Conferencerates were to evolve and lead that to be the stimulus towards rebalancing and enabling those countries with large trade deficits to reduce them, and for countries with large trade surpluses to reduce those too.So I don't think this is a question of saying what everyone must do is a fiscal package ­ and indeed that's not what Dominique Strauss­Kahn said. He said where countries have an ability to do it, they might want to look at it. But they can also look at their own monetary policy.Your central projection shows inflation rising above 3%, and I wonder what do you think the probability is that you'll have to write a letter this year? And secondly, how does the continued decline in the jobless rate affect your expectations of a consumer slow­down?I'll ask you to repeat the second bit in a minute. On the first one, well certainly over the next couple of years it's odds on that I'll have to write another letter. Can't be entirely sure in which direction but certainly odds on that a letter will need to be written, I suspect. Precisely what the probability is who can judge? But it's more likely than not would be my guess. The second question was ­ ?About the decline in the jobless rate and how that affects your expectations of consumer demand.These were the figures published this morning. I don't think it affects our overall view that the labour market is broadly flat. I think we would expect, consistent with our central projection in today's report, that we would see some easing of the labour market and therefore probably some small, modest rise in unemployment over the next couple of years. But I think what it
Chris Giles. Financial Times:Mervyn King: Chris Giles, Financial Times:Page 6 Inflation Report Press Conferenceis is a reminder of the fact that probably pressures on capacity were somewhat greater in the first half of last year than we perhaps had realised at the time. So there was a little more upward pressure on inflation in the first half of last year. That was one of the debates that was going on within the Monetary Policy Committee.And perhaps it's a cautionary tale to those who feel that doom and gloom is already here, because we've now seen ­ if you look at the facts, the data looking backwards ­ we've now seen unemployment falling and the growth rate in the fourth quarter of last year, which is the last period for which we have any estimate at all; the initial estimate of that was 0.6%, which is very close to the long run average growth rate of the UK economy.So I think I would encourage you to present a balanced picture and not just to focus on lurid headlines about forecasts of doom and gloom to come. There's a great deal of uncertainty. We're not complacent at all, and we spell out the risks here; there are lots of risks. But nevertheless, if you look at the data so far, the data cannot be described as doom and gloom.Governor, could you just confirm that you thought that writing a letter was more likely than not. I think that we've ­Yes, indeed more likely that not.The actual question I wanted to ask was ­ if you look at your inflation profile, it looks as though inflation's going to be above target for the whole period from 2005 to 2010; that's five years. Why is it unreasonable for households and consumers to raise their expectations of inflation? Isn't it reasonable for them to expect inflation to be above target at the moment, given that ­ ?
Mervyn King:Page 7 Inflation Report Press ConferenceWell, they'll have to form a judgement not just about the fan charts that we show here, but also about the likely path of policy. I mean, clearly we want to bring inflation back to the target, and that would be our clear strategy and objective. We're not going to raise interest rates in the next two or three months in order to bring inflation back from wherever it goes in the next two or three months, to 2 immediately because to do that would require a massive rise in interest rates. So we're not focusing on the next few months. We have to look further ahead. It takes time for interest rates to work through.So we have to accept that there will be some short run rise in inflation about which it would not be sensible for us to claim that we could prevent it. But nevertheless we're by no means indifferent to it, and it's precisely the risk to which you point that gives us most concern. And we will be doing everything we can to try to encourage people to understand that ­ just as last year, when inflation did rise from around 2 to around 3% and fell back ­ and remember when I had to write a letter last year, when in March inflation reached 3.1%, and I sent the letter to the Chancellor in April ­ people did write stories ­ the MPC have lost the plot, inflation is out of control.We said then we were concerned about the risk that inflation expectations would stay high; we were not indifferent to this, but in our judgement we had raised interest rates by enough to ensure that inflation would come back to the target. And indeed, by July even, inflation had come back to the target and it's still very close to the target.Now we've seen these short run rises in inflation that are in the offing now with the increase in domestic gas and electricity prices. There will be an impact from the fall in the exchange
Ashley Seager, Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 8 Inflation Report Press Conferencerate, and there are some very sharp rises not just in energy, but also in food, and these will come through too. And we are very, very determined to ensure that people are clear that we will take whatever measures are necessary to bring inflation back to the target.But we are looking beyond the immediate short term towards the end of the forecast period, to make sure that we can bring inflation back to target but within a time period that does not ensure that we have to generate a very serious downturn.That's not the objective here; the objective is to ensure that inflation ­ after its initial rise ­ steadily comes back to target. That is in the central projection, though as you point out, conditional on the market path of the yield curve, then inflation does not get back to the target before the end of the forecast period. If interest rates were held constant then it would be below the target at the end of the forecast period.But what we have to do is to monitor the balance between these two key risks of high inflation expectations on the one hand and a sharp slowing of demand on the other, and see what the data tell us about the balance between these two risks as time evolves. And there's no point speculating now what that means for the path of interest rate ­ no one can know. But what we are determined to do is to bring inflation back to the target ­ that is our responsibility.Question I think for you, Governor, and possibly for Paul Tucker. How bad is the credit crunch relative to perhaps where you expected it to be three months ago? What's your best guess about how long it might last?Well let me make one overall comment and then perhaps Paul could say something in detail more specific about a number of
Page 9 Inflation Report Press Conferencefinancial markets. The broad comment I'd make is that there are, if you like, it's important to distinguish between the two sides of the market here. What we've seen in the last six months has been a very difficult position for lenders, particularly banks, players in financial markets. And we've seen some improvement in some parts of those markets, but not in all. And I'll ask Paul to comment on that in a minute.On the potential borrowers' side we've not yet seen significant concern about the rates at which people will have to borrow. Certainly for the riskier borrowers there is no doubt that, whether it's in the mortgage market for households, or the corporate lending markets for risky, particularly small companies, that interest rates have risen, credit is less easily available; our credit conditions survey shows that very clearly.For others the fall in the yield curve has helped to offset some of the rise in interest rates charged to borrowers that would otherwise have taken place. And the business surveys at this stage still show that this is not a major issue for business. Now that's in part because obviously companies do not borrow for investment every week or every month, and only a small portion of them would have been expected to see it so far.So I don't want to downplay it, and our credit conditions survey certainly shows a restriction of credit. Nevertheless, it is very striking that once you get away from London, and certainly from the City, and move away from the financial sector, that outside London the mood music is really very different. And there is caution and there is concern; but it certainly is not this doom and gloom message that you get from people connected with financial services and property. Those are the two sectors where you really see negative sentiment. Sentiment is by no means as negative elsewhere. And that's another part; try to
Paul Tucker:Page 10 Inflation Report Press Conferencesee it in perspective. So I'd encourage all of you to make a regional visit to another part of the country over the next month and write it up ­ write up your experiences and give us a balanced viewpoint. Don't be taken in by too many of the analysts who are perhaps coloured somewhat by the environment within which they have to work in the financial sector. And getting outside is a pretty good antidote to that. This is not to say that credit conditions have not tightened significantly; they clearly have. But it's just to try and put it in perspective from where we start, which was an economy which last year was growing above trend, and many parts of the economy were doing pretty well.Now on the financial aspect of it, let me ask Paul to comment.Thanks Mr Governor. Can I take you to page 15, chart 1.12 which shows the credit conditions survey. And the diamonds, the red diamonds show what respondents to our survey are saying they think will happen in the coming quarter. And the blue bars show what they think they've actually done. And the significant thing over the last three months is that the blue bars are pretty well all worse then what they were expecting to do over the last quarter and they expect things to get tougher still.As the Governor says, things are perhaps a little bit better in some markets but they're most definitely worse in other markets. There have been caricaturing, there have been three phases to this episode. The first two phases are driven largely by deleveraging in the financial system of not only sub­prime holdings but a whole range of other things. And that led initially to a liquidity crunch in a variety of markets and then from the autumn onwards to questions about the capitalisation of the banking system.
Fasial Islam, Channel 4:Page 11 Inflation Report Press ConferenceReally since the end of last year the bigger question as been to what extent deterioration in the world economy will feed back into the position of the banking sector. So a mild feedback loop is I think at play in a degree.Where that's manifesting itself most obviously is in the wholesale loan markets, which are really not better than they were during the autumn of last year. And I think most commentators would think probably worse. The securitisation markets have not reopened which impairs the ability of many banks around the world to fund themselves via the capital markets. The equity markets have softened, in a way catching up with the credit markets. But returning to something the Governor said the money markets have so far been somewhat better than people perhaps feared in the run up to the end of the year.You also asked Ashley about how long this would persist. I think it's fair to say that if you go back three or four months that most people in the market thought that things would be starting to get better during the spring. There are many people out there now that expect this to drag on for some time longer. But, I think an important ­ the next few weeks are going to be very important where the biggest banks in the world and the second tier banks reveal their results. A precondition for things getting better, a necessary condition, probably not sufficient is that banks and others take a robust approach to valuing their books and make that apparent to the world. And just how far that process goes and whether there are nasty surprises in it, I think we'll be in a better position to know in a months' time.Are we over the worst problems in the inter bank markets now and into a new phase? And some mortgage providers are talking of this phrase a credit famine, it seems to be that you're
Mervyn King:Page 12 Inflation Report Press Conferencesaying that this reduction in credit available might be a good thing for the adjustment in the economy, is that right?Well I think the growth rates of money and credit that we saw in the previous two to three years were not sustainable. So I think some slow down in credit is a good thing yes. Now of course if it goes too far and leads to a sharp slowing in demand that leads to a downturn that will have gone too far. But we can adjust our interest rate policy to try to deal with that.In terms of money markets as Paul said things are not as bad as many people had feared, we got through the end of the year. But there has been one very distinct change which is it's not to do with liquidity now. And we do ­ in fact there's a chart in the report ­ chart 1.4 on page 11, which decomposes the spread between Libor rates and the future expected policy rates, this OIS rate. That's at the bottom of page 11, the lower chart. And you can see that the green line which is really to do with liquidity shot up a lot in August. It came down quite sharply, it moved up a little bit in December, but has now fallen way back to pretty close to its normal level.Now, the issue is not liquidity now, most of the major banks have more than enough liquidity. The concern is counter­party credit risk and concern about the balance sheets of other banks and not knowing quite how big losses will be revealed in due course and whether banks will be able to capitalise themselves.What has gone up of course is the blue line which is the estimated credit premium. And that shows that that problem which is concern about counter­parties and the balance sheets of other banks has got worse. Now overall the spread has come down and in the UK the spreads here have been between 40 and 45 basis points in the last few weeks. It had come down
Stephanie Flanders, BBC: NewsnightMervyn King:Page 13 Inflation Report Press Conferenceeven more than that at the beginning of the year. This is well below the high levels of over a hundred basis points that we saw in mid December around the time of the internationally coordinated Central Bank operation.But you know as Paul said the nature of the problem has changed, it's not about liquidity, this is about genuine concern about the capital position of banks. So to add to what Paul said it's important in my view not just that banks are clear about revealing the extent of losses but also that they recapitalise their position and not delay too long in restoring the capital position. That may not be comfortable for existing shareholders, but it certainly will be a whole lot healthier for the future of banks themselves and the UK economy.Governor you said in your statement that monetary policy could not and should not try to reverse the unwinding of imbalances that's taken place over the last few years. You also said in yourresponse to Bill Keegan if I understood you that fiscal stimulus wasn't necessarily an appropriate policy, and particularly in the countries with large imbalances might impede the process of adjustment that's underway. The Federal Reserve as undertaken very dramatic interest rate cuts, apparently designed to reverse the unwinding of imbalances and the administration is undergoing a big fiscal stimulus despite the fact that it is a very large deficit country. Can we conclude that you disapprove of these policies?No I'm not a position to set Federal Reserve policy and I wouldn't try to second guess what they've done; you'd have to ask them for an explanation of their actions. They clearly have not been trying to reverse some of these changes in relative prices, which is the phrase I used. Because if they were trying to reverse the fall in the dollar, which has gone a very long way
Hugh Pym, BBCMervyn King:Page 14 Inflation Report Press Conferencenow in the past three years they wouldn't be cutting interest rates as sharply as they are. So some of these changes have clearly be well integrated into the policy stance that they've taken. But they will know and they're in a better position to judge than I am about the likely path for the future of the US economy.What I'm talking about here is the likely path for the UK economy and I think that's rather different.You mentioned the possibility of falls in asset prices if they happen being a downside risk to demand. How would you judge the chance of there being quite a prolonged slowdown in the housing market, both for transactions and prices and that having quite a big impact on the wider economy?Well, I think the central view in this forecast is that you know, looking several years ahead, there's no reason to expect house prices to be ­ markedly above where they are now. It's conceivable there might be falls in house prices, but broadly speaking we're looking for quite a long period now of stability in house prices. And that would enable there to be quite a marked adjustment in the ratio of different measures of affordability, such as house prices to earnings for example.You know four years of broadly flat house prices would mean a change of around 20% in the ­ a fall of 20% in the ratio of house prices to average earnings. So you can get quite big adjustments in the housing market without having to see large falls in house prices. None of us know what will happen to house prices. Clearly given that we had flat house prices in the fourth quarter, again in January it's quite possible there maybe some fall in house prices but no one can know that. The big picture is consistent with broad stability.
Sam Fleming, Daily Mail:Page 15 Inflation Report Press ConferenceNow what does the mean for total demand in the economy? As we've said in the past, I think it's very unclear between what the link between house prices and spending actually is, because that depends on what's driving the fall in house prices. To the extent that what's driving the reduced activity in the housing market and a weaker rate of price growth in the housing market, if that's coming from tighter credit conditions then other things being equal that's going to be a slowing in consumer spending because it's a rise in effective borrowing rates. And that will encourage a higher saving ratio. And if the outlook over the next few years is one in which the savings rate does recover to somewhat more normal levels from its pretty low level to which it has fallen then you'd expect to see you know very weak consumer spending growth. And indeed our central projection here does have very weak consumer spending during 2008, then gradually picks up. It never gets back to rates above the long run historical trend in the forecast period; it gets back to around that. But we have a period of weak growth here, there's no doubt about it and it's particularly focussed on consumer spending.But that's why it's important to look at the economy as a whole. And if you do that then the central projection here has some slowing in growth, but by you know the history of the UK in the post war period it's a pretty modest slowing in growth. And towards the end of the period growth has come back to around its normal and historical average.I had a question about the declines we've seen in sterling. How big a factor do you think the widening current account deficit has been in driving the declines in sterling? And do you think we're going to see a similar trend moving forward, I mean as this
Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Page 16 Inflation Report Press Conferencereport says we are now the biggest current account gap in the G7?It's hard to judge because that very large figure for the current account deficit, as you said the largest in any quarter since quarterly data was first made available in the mid 1950s. So pretty big on the face of it. But it may well be temporary, it may well be that in the fourth quarter it will come back somewhat. It's obviously not true of the figures for trade, but it may be true of the investment income from overseas, the net investment income from overseas figures, we'll have to see.But I would have thought that it did bring to attention, to investors minds the fact that there maybe a need for long run rebalancing of the UK economy and that some adjustment in the real exchange rate would go along with that. So I wouldn't be surprised if that had played a role in the 6% fall in sterling over the past quarter, since the November Inflation Report.Going forward it's impossible to tell. I mean no one can forecast exchange rates and I simply don't know. We do point out that there is a chart here for ­ page 12, chart 1.6, the middle chart 1.6. 12 month sterling risk reversals, which is an estimate of the market view, market judgement about whether the risks to the exchange rate, the effective exchange rate for sterling or more on the upside or the downside. And you can see that over the past six months the markets view about the likely risks to sterling have moved quite markedly to the downside from a position of balance risks. So the market is clearly thinking the risks are more on the downside than the upside. But what will happen we will see.Governor, I just wonder given that there have been many stories recently about how lenders are not apparently passing on the
Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph: Mervyn King:Page 17 Inflation Report Press Conferenceinterest rate cuts to their borrowers. I wonder whether you would go so far as to echo the Chancellors words and to urge them to do so yourself?Secondly I had another question which was before you last interest rate meeting in January the Chancellor and the Prime Minister were quoted, as saying that there was room for manoeuvre for the MPC. And this was widely taken as a hint that you could go ahead and cut should you want to. I wonder whether you were concerned about that coming straight before that meeting?On that second one, all I will say is that never in any conversation that I've had with either Chancellor since 1997 has there been any attempt to encourage us to move interest rates in either direction or to give us a view ­ or to tell us what their view was as to the appropriate action. And I think that would be a foolish thing for anyone to try to do. The MPC makes up its mind, there is a group of nine people, I'm only one of nine and it will do so in the future. So I don't think there's been attempt to do that. And certainly it's a far cry from many finance ministers in Europe who seem to be kind of unabashed in their wish to set out clearly their advice to the European Central Bank which frankly has been totally ignored over the last some years. So it's not a great thing to do to stand up and give advice when you know it's going to be ignored.On the first point, which was remind me again?About possible ...Oh yes, well I'm not a great one either for ­ you know if I don't think it's sensible for the Chancellor to tell us what to do in our job, nor do I think it's very sensible for me to tell building
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg:Page 18 Inflation Report Press Conferencesocieties and banks what to do in their job. It seems to me what we have to rely on is competition. And if competition fails to bring down mortgage rates when we cut the bank rate then we have to ask whether this is a market phenomenon or whether it's lack of competition? And that's not for us to look at. But I don't think there's any evidence that there's a lack of competition.What we have seen over the last five years is that in say the three years up to last summer then despite the fact that we were raising interest rates; actually mortgage rates did not rise as fast as the increase in bank rates. And that's because there was a great deal of competition and some lenders were content to narrow the margins at which they were lending. That wasn't entirely wise perhaps in the event.Now we're going through a period where the margin is adjusting back to normal. And so it wouldn't be surprising if not all the full extent of interest rate cuts were actually passed on in an arithmetic sense, not because people aren't saying the bank rate has cut we should change our lending rate, but because at the same time as we are ­ or have been cutting bank rate there has been another factor going on which is a natural reversion to a somewhat less compressed margin on lending that had been the case ­ or reached by the middle of last year.So you know we will take into account what we see happening in the market when we reach our decisions. But I think exhortations to all kinds of people are not terribly productive really.You've mentioned in the report the prospect that credit conditions could remain quite tight. And I wondered what you would say to sort of the average citizen, perhaps one even outside of London why they should consider that their inflation
Mervyn King:Page 19 Inflation Report Press Conferenceexpectations should be moderated. I mean from the research that has been coming out lately, it looks like the expectations have got quite high. What would you say to the average citizen to dislodge them at a time when petrol prices are quite high and banks aren't passing along the savings on lower interest rates to their consumers?Well I'd say it's perfectly reasonable to believe that over the next few months inflation will rise. After all that's our own central projection. What I would ask them to do is to distinguish between the short term rises that are coming in as a result of higher world energy and food prices and higher import prices, distinguish that which is a one off adjustment from the fact that we are determined on the MPC to bring inflation back to target over the next two years or so, in the medium term. So that they shouldn't extrapolate from the increase in inflation that's happening now into the future, there's no obvious reason to expect these sharp increases in energy and food prices to be repeated. And even if energy and food prices stay at the new higher level as long as they don't rise again by the same amount then inflation will other things being equal come down.That's exactly what happened last year. And now we should expect it I think to happen over the next 18 months or so. So I would ask people to sort of look forward and expect that the Bank of England will ensure that inflation will be brought back. But there is no point us all going mad and pretending that's sensible to double interest rates in order to bring it back in the next six months. You know that would not be a sensible response, it's not our remit. The remit makes it very clear that if to do that would create undesirable volatility and output which it most certainly would then we shouldn't do that. But we are looking through this short term rise in inflation and inflation will
Paul Wallace, Economist:Page 20 Inflation Report Press Conferencecome back to the target thereafter. And that's what I would ask them to look at.But it goes along with a recognition that this higher level of energy and food prices is a genuine reduction in our standard of living relative to where it would otherwise have been. These are higher prices that the UK as a whole, all of us are having to pay to import energy and food and other goods from the rest of the world. And we have to understand that that's not something that we can offset by just demanding higher wages, because all that will do is lead to another round of higher prices. It can't offset the reduction in our standard of living from these higher prices from the rest of the world. That's something that we all need to understand. And I think people did understand it last year. It's unfortunate and difficult that they're faced with another round this year.But it's conceivable that if the world economy slows that we'll start to see a fall back in energy prices. And it's conceivable that if we don't see a repeat of some of the drought conditions that led to a sharp rise in food prices in the world in the last half of last year that you know those prices might come down a bit too. And that will aid the reduction in inflation that we're trying to engineer during the course of 2009. So I would ask people to understand the difference between this initial impact on the level of prices that's coming to us from the rest of the world and the inflation rate that we will allow to arise at home. And we'll set interest rates in order to bring inflation back to the target.Can I quickly ask two. First picking up on your answer just then, how far has you task in communicating your determination to bring inflation down been compromised by the change in the inflation target? For example under RPIX inflation as reported would be 3.4%, there would be no question of odds on of about
Mervyn King:Page 21 Inflation Report Press Conferenceto miss the ­ to write the open letter. And I think one of the reasons why the public might be more worried about inflation expectations is that they think that the thing that you're trying to target and you have to target just bears no resemblance to their experience. And they then revert to looking at the retail price index which has been around 4% and higher, obviously because it's including mortgage interest payments.And the second question ...Let me just answer that ­ I'll never remember it if you go onto the second. I mean I sympathise with much of that and of course where people are concerned about their standard of living, which naturally they are then looking at something like RPIX or RPI is more relevant than looking at CPI because it does include the increases in the cost of living, so it's a better measure of that and I understand that. But that's why I said the aim of monetary policy is not to pretend that we can stop increases in the cost of living, which necessarily come from overseas or from other sources, but to try and ensure that domestically generated inflation is on track to meet our target in the medium term.But I've said in the past that I think it would be better to have an index that includes house prices for example, I've been very clear on that. We don't have that at present. And our friends in Euro Stat are carrying on their research into how you might modify CPI to include housing. And I'm pretty confident that I'll be long gone as Governor before we get an answer to that. So it will be left to others to take that forward. But you know there's an issue there clearly.But I don't think you should necessarily exaggerate it. We are right now at the point where these differences seem to be at their biggest. This is not the time for anyone involved in wage
Paul Wallace, Economist:Mervyn King: Charlie Bean:Page 22 Inflation Report Press Conferencebargaining to nail their colours to the mast of using RPI. A year or so from now, 18 months from now RPI might well be below CPI. These things move around. And those people who said you know you've got to give me a wage increase based on RPI not CPI may look somewhat less credible a year or so from now if RPI turns out to be below the CPI, it's quite possible. It's not certain but it's possible. These things do move around.So I agree it looks ­ you can see the differences now, and I understand why people are concerned about the higher costs that they're paying for a wide range of things but this adjustment in costs of food and energy and indeed in some cases higher interest payments on mortgages is a one off level adjustment, it's not an underlying continuing inflationary pressure unless it gets embedded in inflation expectations. And clearly our aim has to be to ensure that it doesn't and to take whatever action is necessary to stop that.Could I just ask a quick second one which is about the reasons ­ the main reasons why you have lowered the growth forecast since November? You've referred in one of the answers to a period of very weak consumer spending this year. Is it mainly consumer spending? I mean what about the effects of lower growth in export markets?Well let me ask Charlie to take that one.The primary drivers are revisions to the consumption and investment profiles, consumption particularly which the Governor has already talked about. Also the investment profiles are a bit weaker, partly commercial and residential investment, partly non­residential business investment. And that reflects a view that we think the impact of developments and credit
Alistair Sharp, Reuters:Mervyn King:Page 23 Inflation Report Press Conferencemarkets are likely to have a somewhat stronger effect than we thought back in November.As regards to the rest of the world our view on global developments is somewhat weaker than back in November but that is largely, well it’s more than largely, offset by the depreciation of sterling. So actually the net trade picture looks markedly stronger than back in November, both as a result of the fact that domestic demand is weaker so imports are weaker, and we have this kick from the exchange rate onto exports.I'd just like to know given how critical inflation expectations are, how the MPC rates the relative importance of the different measures being public sentiment, producing figures and the market expectations?I’ll make one comment and then ask perhaps both Charlie and Paul to say a word. Inflation expectations are very important both in the determination of inflation in the medium term and in our assessment of the risks. So we’d like to have good measures of inflation expectations. Sadly we don’t. We have broadly speaking two kinds of measures, the short term measures based on surveys where we have the problem really that you know we expect them to be higher now because we all know that the higher fuel bills are coming in so it wouldn’t be surprising that they've gone up. They didn’t come down last year as much as they might have done when inflation fell back but I’ll ask Charlie to say a word about these surveys because we carry out one of the surveys, how much weight we want to put on these surveys.The other kind of information is from financial markets where you can look at the difference between the yield on index linked and conventional government bonds. And that provides a
Charlie Bean:Page 24 Inflation Report Press Conferencemeasure of expected inflation plus a risk premium for inflation. And that gives some medium term estimate of people's concerns but it of course can also be affected perhaps by the extent to which the markets are giving genuine readings in both cases about underlying real interest rates and I’ll ask Paul to say a word on that. But let me start with Charlie and the surveys.Okay I might want to draw your attention to the box on pages 36 and 37 incidentally which discusses these various measures of inflation expectations and their problems at some length. As regards the surveys there's always an issue about how you map from the question, which is typically what do you think is happening to prices in the shops, across to measures whether they be CPI or RPI. I think it’s fair to say that as a profession we don't have a good understanding of how people, households in particular, form their expectations, what are the key drivers.One of the things that we’ve been looking at as we’ve gathered more information from this survey is to try and see if it’s particularly driven by things like movements in the prices of products which are bought very frequently like food, or things which have very high profile like petrol, domestic energy, things like that. It may well be to the extent that those commodities loom larger in households' consciousness than the occasional plasma screen TV that they go off and buy where the price has of course been falling very sharply. Then it may help to explain why as inflation expectation has moved up through the first part of last year they didn’t then fall back as headline inflation measures fell back.I think it’s worth noting that there's one area where there's a significant lacuna in these measures. We have these survey measures of household inflation expectations which obviously have shortcomings, and we have measures of market
Paul Tucker:Page 25 Inflation Report Press Conferenceexpectations which Paul will say a few words about in a moment which are in chart B in this box. What we don’t have at the moment is good measures of businesses inflation expectations and of course businesses inflation expectations are particularly important because they’re likely to impact on businesses current pricing decisions. We do have surveys of their pricing intentions which covers what they’re actually intending to do but it’s not a direct measure of their inflation expectations. And that is one area where in principle we’d like to try and fill the gap. Our Agents tell us something about what agents are viewing about the medium term inflation outlook but it will be good to fill that hole in due course.So the market based measures of inflation expectations are derived from the difference between the yields on nominal government bonds and index linked real government bonds. And as the government says they therefore ­ that difference that wedge reflects two things. First of all the rate of inflation that market expects to prevail over a period and also the risk or uncertainty around that expectation.There are three caveats to these measures. The first is the index bonds are indexed to the RPI and not to the CPI and therefore an adjustment has to be made to the wedge between RPI or the CPI or more correctly to the market's expectation of the wedge that will prevail in the future. So to the extent that the market becomes more uncertain about that wedge that would tend to increase the difference and I think it would be bold to leap to the conclusion “oh that means inflation expectations have gone up”.The second thing is that I think it is possible that uncertainty about future inflation has gone up because the last few years have emphasised the degree to which cost shocks from abroad
Faisal Islam, Channel 4:Mervyn King:Page 26 Inflation Report Press Conferencecan affect the path of inflation. But one would expect that to turn up in options prices and in fact that isn’t particularly marked in options prices for sterling inflation expectations in contrast actually for dollar inflation expectations.And the third caveat is the distortion that's discussed widely in the market which is that the demand for long maturity inflation index bonds, particularly from the pension fund sector in order to hedge their index inflation linked liabilities, is very considerable and probably pulls down the yield on real bonds and pushes up the derived inflation expectation.Now what we actually do is we go out and ask people who buy these bonds, the big asset managers and we ask them whether they think that the increase in market derived inflation expectations is reflecting the fact that their inflation expectations have actually gone up and we get a ­ so far we have received a reassuring message from the big institutional asset managers about that. But this isn’t something that we are complacent about and are persistently repeating that question because it’s absolutely fundamental to whether or not the regime is credible.Two quick questions if I may Governor. How important a causal factor is public sector pay settlements? It doesn’t seem to feature particularly heavily in this inflation report.Well clearly they affect the tone of the labour market as a whole and will have an effect on the likely path of private sector settlements in due course. So it is important that they are consistent with being able to hit the inflation target. But that's a matter for government. We have never set out to say either for an individual company or a sector what the pay settlements should be or what pay growth should be. Our concern is looking at the economy as a whole.
Faisal Islam, Channel 4:Mervyn King:Alex Brittan, Thomson Financial:Mervyn King:Page 27 Inflation Report Press ConferenceAnd if the government were to follow Dominic Strauss­Khan's advice on some sort of fiscal stimulant would you expect in the interests of macro economic policy coordination to be advised or consulted in advance?The MPC will be briefed before the budget on what the budget will contain yes.How concerned are you that fears of a sharp slowdown or even a recession might be self fulfilling?Well probably somewhat less than I am concerned that fears of higher inflation will lead to higher inflation itself. I think that's much more directly the link between expectations and outturns. As I've said a lot of it therefore must be down to you. I mean what we’re struck by is that the mood and tone outside London and outside the financial and property sectors is not as bad as it is in those sectors. And that reflects the fact I think that you see the biggest slowdowns in those sectors. It’s not surprising but it would be a mistake to generalise form those sectors and say that is absolutely representative. It isn’t, it’s not the average, it’s at the bottom end.And again we’re certainly not complacent as Paul said. We are seeing here some of the bigger changes that we've seen in the history of the Monetary Policy Committee, downside to growth, upside to inflation. So we're moving into territory that not many people have seen us operate in before and that is bound to create some uncertainty and that's why it is absolutely crucial that people understand that we are completely focussed on meeting inflation target in the medium term.
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 28 Inflation Report Press ConferenceGovernor in recent speeches you repeatedly used the example of Countrywide Mortgages in the US and contrasted that with Northern Rock. The real difference with Countrywide and Northern Rock really isn’t whether the credit lines they had from private banks but their access to the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta where they borrowed more than 50 billion dollars from them against their mortgage securities. This is exactly what UK mortgage companies are calling on the authorities on the Tripartite Authorities to do to ease the credit crunch here. Can you give us your views on whether that's a good idea and how that would then impact on monetary policy as well?Well I don’t want to comment on the particular Countrywide case and I think what happened to Countrywide in August was very much to do with having contingent credit lines and most important of all was to do with having a special resolution regime for banks and 100% deposit insurance up to some limit. And I'm glad to say that the three things that I argued for in September and October at the Treasury Committee and in a speech in October are very much at the heart of the consultation document that was published last month. And this is fundamental.In terms of trying to have anything that looks like a public subsidy to lend against particular kinds of assets you need to be extraordinarily cautious. Most of the past 15 years the Federal Reserve has been very, very clear that it regretted the fact that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were in the position that they were. And the last thing they wanted to see was Congress expand the role and extent of those agencies because they simply didn’t want people to believe that they actually had an underlying federal guarantee. It is quite important not to feel that particular kinds of lending are subsidised and others are not. That will lead to distortions and people expanding lending in ways that are inappropriate and risky because they believe
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 29 Inflation Report Press Conferencethey've got a federal backing behind it. So it is a route that we ought to be extraordinarily cautious before exploring.Governor when you had to write your open letter last year you could point to the fact that interest rates had gone up and indeed the public response or the outside response to that letter seem to contribute to a mood of hawkishness on the MPC, the response you referred to earlier. If you have to write a letter in the next few months it will be after interest rates have come down, at least so far come down, how difficult a task will that be to explain what the bank is doing?Well it will be harder in one respect and perhaps easier in another. It will be harder in the sense that as you say people will say well why did they cut interest rates if inflation went up to this level. To which the answer will be well we said that inflation was going to rise, this is not an unexpected development. We said inflation would pick up, we said it was more likely than not that we'd have to write a letter. The reason we did cut interest rates was because we were focussed on meeting inflation target drop about two years down the road. And if we were to focus on meeting the inflation target say in six months time which may be closer to the peak of when inflation gets to 3% or so, if we were to focus our policy today on that we would significantly increase the risk of inflation undershooting the target 18 months, two years, three years, maybe four years down the road. So we are trying to take that longer term view which is what we’re supposed to, the remit makes that clear too.And so we’ll be explaining to people this is the hard part, yes we did cut interest rates, but we feel this rise in inflation is temporary and we don’t think that the causes of it, these increases in domestic gas and electricity prices, food prices from the rest of the world, higher energy prices, are likely to recur.
Hugh Pym, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 30 Inflation Report Press ConferenceThey may do, we can’t be sure but that's not a central view. And if they weren’t to recur then inflation will fall back.The bit that's easier is that last year when I had to write the letter we on the committee when discussing it, we were ­ we couldn’t point to any previous episode where we could say well we had to write a letter, we said inflation would come down and it did come down. Now we can point back to last year and say yes we had to write a letter, it got a lot of excited publicity for which I regret to say some of you were partially responsible, not all of you and I hope you will be somewhat more moderate in your comments next time if it were to occur. And we’ll be able to say we wrote the letter, we gave the explanation, we said inflation would come down and it did. So we have a track record. We hope therefore you'll be inclined to believe us on this occasion too and we’re taking the long view.I also don’t think many people at present, I mean I haven’t read all your cuttings and columns and words of wisdom but I haven’t seen many people in the last month pressing the Bank of England sharply to raise interest rates to prevent the increase in inflation which I think the market has now taken on board is likely to be the case over the next six to nine months.I'm not sure if the R word has been mentioned today but I’ll mention it. How do you assess the chances of recession in the United States and notwithstanding that how do you assess the chances of recession in the UK?I take it by recession you mean two successive quarters of negative growth and I think that you should sort of ­ our charts are obviously for something rather different which is growth over the previous 12 months. And from the economic point of view I think that's a more interesting way of looking at it.
Page 31 Inflation Report Press ConferenceI have no idea what the precise risk is and what I would say is that the reason we don’t focus on it is that there's a world of difference between two quarters where growth was minus 0.1% which is perfectly consistent with something not very far off our central projection possibly, certainly not that far away from it. Or you know six quarters of minus half a percent of a quarter percent a quarter which would be much more serious and would create difficulty and would probably mean that we generate sufficient spare capacity to push inflation well below the target. Those are the things that matter, not whether it meets some technical definition of recession. Now I think as you can see our forecast, not just a central projection but much of the uncertainty, doesn’t really get anywhere near the sort of very serious downturn that I say will be the thing we'll be worried about.So you know I'm not going to pretend that we can forecast the future but let’s focus on the underlying economics of it. We do see a slowing. We see in due course that that slowing will unwind. But this is going to be part of a rebalancing process and it makes the timing of the pick up in certain kinds of demand like exports hard to judge relative to the slowing of other components of demand such as consumer spending. And it partly accounts for much of the response you see in terms of public comment by representatives of different industries, because there is no doubt that some sectors will be in a position where they will feel they are doing very much worse than they have done for well over a decade. And anyone connected with retail is going to be in that position. Many people connected with retail I should say.Whereas manufacturers and exporters will be feeling that conditions are by no means the worst for over a decade. They
Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 32 Inflation Report Press Conferencehad their difficult period in the late '90s when the exchange rate went up a great deal. So there is a mixed response from different sectors and when we have meetings, when I go outside London and go to whether it’s factory visits or meet groups of people in the business community outside London, I would say relative to many periods in the last five years this is now one where the experience that you get is very different from different sorts of sectors around the table.I wanted to congratulate you on your reappointment. I also was just curious as to your reaction upon hearing of your reappointment. Was it relief of slight dread of another five years of being grilled by ourselves and the Treasury Select Committee? Also ...Well given some of the public comment about it I did have the feeling that you know I've managed to escape from Colditz but then got recaptured and sent back for another five years. Yeah. Anyway let's look forward to the next five years with a bit of optimism.Do you expect the next five years to be more difficult, less difficult than the previous ones?It depends in what sense. I think I said for a long time that the NICE decade has moved on and I think we did see an extraordinary period and we're now going through a period of readjustment. I don’t know how long that period will last. But I think during the period of rebalancing of the world economy it will be a more difficult and challenging period than we’ve seen in the past. But then we’ll come through that and as I said in Bristol we will return to calmer waters and at that point things will not as difficult as they have been in recent months.
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg:Mervyn King:ENDPage 33 Inflation Report Press ConferenceJust following up on the last question what is on your agenda for the next five years? And that's besides getting inflation to 2%.Well that's something I'm going to go away and reflect on and I'll report back in due course. Next term starts on the 1st of July so perhaps sometime after that we might discuss it.