WORLD TELEVISIONBank of England Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008Transcript by: Mary Burnard, on behalf of Words50 Berkeley Avenue, Greenford, Middx. UB6 0NY Phone: 020 8144 9227	eMail: angelaking.words@gmail.com
Michael Wilson, Sky News:Mervyn King:Hugh Pym, BBC News:Mervyn King:Larry Elliott,Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008Governor, given the deterioration in the forecasts of growth since May, how confident are you that the UK economy won't slip into recession next year?The central projection is one of broadly flat output over the next year, and I think the important question is not whether or not there is a quarter or two of negative growth within that broadly flat path of output, but whether we can maintain the broadly flat path of output or whether there is the downside risk materialising of a much more significant downside, more severe downturn for the economy.The central view is clearly for broadly flat path of output and not for a more severe downturn.Just to follow that up, Governor, does your projection for flat output suggest that a couple of negative quarters is very possible?Well, I think that broadly flat output; it's bound to be the case that there is a possibility of a quarter or two of negative growth. That was the case in May, as I said then. But as I said, the real issue here is not, you know - what is the quarterly path within an overall year of broadly flat output; the question is whether we will achieve that central projection or whether in fact some of the downside risks to output will materialise and you'll see a more severe downturn. There are clearly downside risks.Obviously from the Committee's point of view, what it is focused on is the outlook for inflation, and there we see upside risks.
The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008What signs do you see of wage pressures pushing up inflation, given that unemployment was up 20,000 in the last two months and that the average earnings figures today show another sharp fall in the annual rate of growth? Are there simply any signs really of these wage pressures emerging that you seem to be so concerned about?No, I don't think it's wage pressures as such that are the concern. The concern is much more that we end up in an environment in which firms feel that it is easier to pass on higher costs in the form of higher prices, whether that be the higher import prices we're seeing right across the board following the depreciation of sterling; whether firms try to camouflage increases in costs amongst the rise in inflation that's probably inevitable given the increase in commodity and energy prices; and whether in turn that makes it more likely that firms will resist less strongly demands for higher wages.Wages do not cause inflation; it's a question of what happens at the level of firms. And I think there is the uncertainty there. In the past we have see that when you've seen a prolonged squeeze on real take-home pay, that you see signs of some real wage resistance. And I think - as we say in the Report - we saw some small signs of that in 2004-6, and we've gone through a period now - a squeeze on real incomes. To the extent that the labour market is flexible and we see real wages adjust quickly that will be extremely good news in two respects; because one is that we will not see as big a rise in unemployment as we would otherwise have seen, and secondly it means we won't see the risk of inflation picking up because firms are more willing to concede wage increases - that risk won't materialise.So I think it's in all our interests to try to see a more flexible labour market. But this is not a question of saying that wages
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:David Smith:Mervyn King:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008cause inflation - they don't. It's the pressure of nominal spending on capacity.Governor, you said in your opening statement that inflation will return to target, but you also - and the Report also says - that the risks to inflation are on the upside. So how can you be so certain that inflation will return to target? And secondly .......... Because we will take the action necessary to ensure that it does. Now I can't guarantee the time horizon over which that will happen, but the Monetary Policy Committee is clearly charged with setting policy in a way to bring inflation back to the target.Secondly, if I may, is there anything that, with the benefit of hindsight, that the Bank should have done differently to prevent this above-target inflation period that we're in at the moment?Well I think that the broad picture is that it's very difficult to see what we could have done, because these large increases in prices and food prices particularly, energy prices, the large increases in retail gas and electricity prices, much of that we didn't anticipate even three months ago. So the size of the gas and electricity price increases that have been announced by two of the suppliers are noticeably higher than the figure we had in our May projection.So this is a cost shock coming from the rest of the world economy. We had a mini-version of it last year, at the beginning of last year, and we took appropriate monetary policy action. We said that in our judgement that that rise in inflation then would prove temporary and inflation would come back to the target, and that's exactly what happened. Now this is a bigger
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008and more difficult cost shock to absorb, but nevertheless it's similar in nature and we will have to confront it, and we are making our judgements month by month. I think it's pretty clear that, unless there were to be a further rise in oil, commodity, energy and food prices of the same magnitude that we've seen in the past year - which I think is on nobody's central projection and doesn't look likely at this stage - as long as we don't see that further increases in those prices, then that in itself will bring inflation down somewhat.And the question is how far it will come down and how quickly. And the task of monetary policy is to make sure that over the appropriate horizon the path of inflation will come down to the target. And that's what we're trying to do.The Report says there's an upside risk to inflation and a downside risk to growth, and I note that they are both pitched in terms of medium term risks. In this context - the tenor of the Report tends to balance the two, but surely the remit indicates that the primary task of the Bank is to address that upside risk to inflation which you say is medium term, that's exactly what you're doing?That is exactly what we're doing. The downside risk to growth poses a downside risk to inflation at the two-year horizon. We say on balance that at the two-year horizon the upside risks we think to the central projection - the risks are more on the upside than they are on the downside. But if you look at it, you'll see the central projection is actually for inflation to be a little below the target, conditioned on the path of interest rates used in the projections.
Paul Mason:Mervyn King:Chris Giles, Financial Times:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008But, although that central projection is a little below the target, the risks are on the upside, averaging over all the possible outcomes, we think inflation will come out around the target. But there is no certainty in these things. We have to balance the risks and take a judgement each month - we make it afresh each month - to balance those risks. The risks we are looking at are the upside and the downside risks to inflation; and there are both of those.May I just ask in addition - there's a quite sharp fall in the money supply factored into this in real terms, leaving aside the financial market side of it. The Report says nothing about a potential boost to money supply and demand from any fiscal measures. Is there anything to say about that? The government of course is said to be planning a fiscal stimulus.Well, fiscal policy is a matter for the Treasury; we always make these forecasts conditional upon the latest stated plans for both taxes and spending. And that's exactly what we've done. The government will have to make up its judgement as to what it decides to do on fiscal policy. All I will say on that is that this is a set of circumstances where clearly a sharp slowing in the economy will affect the receipts of government; the changes in the financial sector have also had implications for the fiscal outlook for the government. This is a set of circumstances in which it's extremely important to be able to set the short-term fiscal position in the context of a medium term framework for fiscal policy. That medium term framework is crucial, and I see absolutely no reason to suppose that the government has changed its mind on that.Governor, between 2005 and projected 2010 on your forecasts, it looks to me as if inflation - CPI inflation - is going to average
Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008much closer to 3% rather than 2%. Do you think this is an acceptable performance for the MPC? And, secondly, why, given this, should people actually expect inflation to fall back to 2% as confidently as you do?Well, I think I'm happy to let the judgement about acceptability be a matter for you. But after we've seen a very sharp spike in inflation resulting from a rise in energy prices and food and commodity prices, I do not think it is very surprising that you see a movement above the target. If you remember, the very first speech I gave as Governor in 2003 I pointed out that the extraordinary stability of inflation over the previous ten years was not something that we should expect to continue. And I've tried very hard for the last five years to get people used to the idea that there will be movements of inflation both up and below the target.Now we have seen a movement above target. Our aim is to bring it back to target. If you're suggesting that what we should do is consciously now to plan for a period of below target inflation, that's not quite what the remit says. We will bring it back to target. But there will be times - as in fact we saw - during that period there were a number of people who said - how on earth will you ever get CPI inflation up to 2%? There were a number of people arguing that and saying - it's hard to imagine that CPI inflation at 1% will ever again rise back to the 2% target. Well, it certainly did; it went beyond that.Now there will always be movements around it. What matters is that the stance of monetary policy is always aimed at bringing inflation back to the target, and over a long period we can demonstrate that inflation therefore will average around the target.
Chris Giles: Mervyn King:Edmund Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008Five years is quite a long period.No, it's not a very long period when you see a rise in oil prices which has now, you know, quadrupled in the space of four years. This increase in oil and energy prices, which was not easy to anticipate, and I freely admit we didn't anticipate how high oil and energy prices would go. But that's been continuing for four years now.House prices have fallen very fast over the past year, faster indeed by most measures than they did in the early '90s. You say in the Report that, whilst some homeowners have big equity cushions, not all homeowners are lucky enough. And that presumably means that negative equity is going to rise considerably over the next few years. Do you suspect that negative equity will reach the same peaks it did in the early '90s? And on that basis, what would you say to homeowners who feel that the Bank ought to be doing more to salve their pain in those circumstances?The aim of the Bank of England, as decided by parliament, is to meet the inflation target, and the best contribution that the Bank of England can make is to make realistic explanations to explain to people why these shocks from the world economy have occurred, why this temporarily means that growth will be weak and inflation high; but to explain to people that we are determined to bring inflation back to target, and when that happens then growth will resume.Now what we've seen in the past year or so is the culmination of a very large rise in energy and commodity prices, such that oil prices are at the highest level in real terms at any point since the post war period apart from the late 1970s, and the rates of
Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008increase are at least as large as we saw then. And also we've seen the biggest financial dislocation since the Second World WarWhat is unique about the present set of circumstances is that both shocks have occurred at the same time. And the combination of those two shocks, which have originated primarily in the rest of the world economy, have meant that life is extremely difficult and will be for the UK economy over the next year. It doesn't mean to say that it will go on for ever - it won't. We say here we'll see slow growth, broadly flat output for around a year, and then growth will resume. Once we see the end to the rapid increases in food and energy prices, which may well happen sooner than many people think - we may be past the worst - hard to judge, that will start to ease the squeeze on real take-home pay and will start to unwind some of the downward pressures on consumer spending, and in turn I suspect the housing market.Now if you look at the housing market, if you look at chart 1.9 in the Report, you can see that, yes, it is true that house prices nave fallen, now by around 10% since the peak last October. But look at the chart showing the ratio of house prices to earnings, because this in some ways is - it's a very rough and ready metric for trying to judge where house prices might go. As you can see it's extremely hard to judge where that line will end up. And it may occur as much from the passage of time with stable house prices as earnings rise, rather than continuing falls in house prices. But I don't think anyone can easily judge how far that will go; we're in a period now where clearly house prices are adjusting to a new level, and both buyers and sellers are struggling to find out what that new level is. The market will determine it - not the government, not us. The market will decide where that level of house prices is.
Edmund Conway: Mervyn King:Laurence Norman,Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008Once we've reached that new level, then I think you'll see conditions in the housing market, particularly in terms of transactions, normalise. But that does not mean going back to the state of the housing market we were in in the first half of last year. That was clearly excessive.And negative equity in particular?I think it's impossible to judge where the numbers will go. What's much more important is what the impact of that would be. And of course, if you go back to some previous downturns, the impact of that was significant on some households for two reasons. The question is - can households continue to service mortgages? That's the essence of the argument as to whether this would have a major impact on the economy or not. Could households continue to service mortgages?In the late '80s one of the reasons why it proved more difficult to service mortgages was because interest rates doubled. I don't think that's remotely likely to happen in present circumstances. The other reason was that we saw a sharp rise in unemployment. Now unemployment will probably rise somewhat, but no one knows how much. And in a flexible labour market, as I said earlier, that flexibility probably means that it won't rise as much as might otherwise have been the case. And I don't think we're facing anything like, therefore, the sorts of circumstances which led households to find it very difficult to service their mortgage payments. We are not - in that respect we are not in the same position as we were before, though we are clearly seeing a significant adjustment to house prices.
Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Charlie Bean:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008A couple of questions. First of all, is there any evidence that the long-term trend growth rate in the UK has dropped over the past six months or so? And secondly, Nat Welling said last week 5% is a threshold above which it's very difficult for central banks to control inflation. Do you think there is a threshold, and are we getting close to it?Well let me take that second one and then perhaps ask Charlie to answer the first one.I don't think there's any arithmetic threshold, no. What is relevant are expectations. And it is more important, I think, that we try to explain as clearly as we can what the reasons for the increase in inflation are, so that people understand the nature of the shocks - these shocks are coming in large part from the rest of the world - and that we don't intend to allow them to persist and become embedded in inflation expectations and in domestic wage and price setting; and that therefore inflation will be temporarily high and will come down. The onus is on us to try to explain that, and we are trying to do it. And today's Report is part of that.So I think it's not so much the level as the reasons for the rise in inflation - and there are good reasons to suppose that this rise in inflation will be temporary and that it will fall back, and that we will take the measures to ensure that it does fall back.In terms of the trend growth of output, let me ask Charlie to comment.Yes. I think you asked whether there's any evidence that the trend rate of growth has fallen over the last few months. The answer to that is - no, you can't look at what's been happening in the last few months and deduce what's happening to
Sam Fleming, Daily Mail:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008underlying supply. But it is plausible to think that over the next two or three years, the underlying rate of growth of potential of the economy, will be somewhat lower than it has been over the past decade or so, for a number of reasons.Firstly, we expect a slowdown to reduce the rate of capital accumulation by businesses. And that will obviously mean that the rate of potential growth will be lower. Secondly, the impact of the credit crunch of the availability of finance is likely to reduce the rate of start-ups of new firms. And that impairment of the market mechanism for competitive process also will tend to reduce the rate of growth, the potential. And thirdly, there is some evidence that labour force growth might be slowing somewhat as a result of a lower rate of inward migration from the A8 countries. And here you might look at Table 3C on page 29, which just produces some evidence on the reduced rate of sign-up for the Worker Registration Scheme and National Insurance numbers by A8 migrants.So it is plausible to expect the underlying rate of growth, the potential, to be somewhat lower over the next few years, and we have in fact made that assumption in the projections that are published today.I wanted to ask, on page 14 you seem to be suggesting that there is going to be further increases in market mortgage rates and lending rates over the coming months. I was wondering if you could explain the drivers behind those further increases which you seem to be clearly suggesting are going to happen irrespective of what happens to the policy rate. And I wondered why giving the continued tightening in credit conditions in the
Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008economy - why the Bank isn't trying to offset that with the policy rate?Well the second one is very clear which is we take all the developments in the economy into account when trying to bring inflation back to the target. We don't just look at one particular measure.I think if you look at chart 1.11 on page 14 I hope that will try and put things into perspective somewhat. If you look at the period from the end of 2005, 2006 into 2007, the period when we were raising interest rates to slow domestic demand growth. The biggest increase in the quoted interest rates, that is the interest rates which are quoted on new mortgages took place then. And what we have seen is that there was then a small fallback as policy rates were cut and then a rise as the spreads in mortgage markets picked up as financial institutions realised that the spreads between the policy rate and the rate at which they were lending had been compressed far too much given the risks that they were facing and they've raised the spreads.But the movement in mortgage rates since last summer has actually been relatively modest. Now these are for mortgages with loan to value ratios of 75%. So what we've got, and I think it's very important to understand this, this is not if you like a uniform phenomenon for all borrowers. For the borrowers that are not perceived as being especially risky, second/third time movers who don't require very high loan to value ratios there hasn't been a significant change in mortgage rates. And indeed if you look at the last observation, I wouldn't put much weight on it, but on the last observation you've actually seen some decline in the spreads. And what that's reflecting is the competition in the financial sector is creating more opportunities for banks and others to lend to home buyers who are perceived as safe, or
Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008less risky borrowers with relatively modest loan to value ratios. And those spreads have actually started to come down as the financial system has adjusted and we've normalised to that.What has happened in terms of higher rates, or the disappearance or mortgages has been for the risky borrowers. And it's not surprising that in a world where house prices are falling that lenders are very cautious now about lending to people who say they'd like a 95 let alone a 100% loan to value ratio or even higher than that. This would not be a prudent form of lending in present circumstances. And there's no doubt that in the first half of 2007 much of the lending that occurred at very high loan to value ratios did not really merit the description prudent.Now we're seeing an adjustment and that adjustment needs to take place. So the adjustment is very much in the form and it's not just in the housing market. You can see it in the lending for industrial borrowing too. But it is the riskier borrowers who are finding it more expensive even if it's possible to obtain a loan. And that's where the credit crunch is hitting.But it hasn't had an enormous impact on those people who are safer, much safer borrowers. That's what you'd expect. We are moving from the imprudent period of excessive lending back to a period now of much more cautious lending. That is reinforced by the need of banks to scale back the growth of their balance sheets given constraints on their capital. And that will continue for a while until the capital base of the banking system can build up.But where there are profitable lending opportunities then competition will find a way to ensure that there are opportunities for those borrowers to obtain funds, if they are not representing
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008unnecessarily large risk. And I think that's the story that you can see in terms of these charts.Yesterday the Chief Secretary to the Treasury emphasised the role of what she called £4 billion pounds of tax cuts in boosting consumers at what you call a difficult and painful adjustment. Is there no role for fiscal activism and more borrowing in ...?I have not commented on whether there is or there isn't and I don't think I should. That is a matter for the Government. And there is no doubt that the growth of take home pay will be helped by the measures that were taken. The Chief Secretary is absolutely right to make that point and it does affect the outlook for consumer spending.But whether there should or should not be fiscal packages is not a matter for me to comment on that's a matter for the Treasury and for the Chancellor and I will leave it to the Treasury.And a second one. Are you now of a view that the worst of the financial dislocation is over?I think it depends precisely what you mean by that. I think it is true to say that in the area of liquidity we probably have moved to a better situation, I'll ask Paul to comment on this in a minute.I think you can see from the measures that central banks have taken around the world, our own Special Liquidity Scheme that the liquidity issues have certainly improved. And I think we're beginning to move to a period of greater differentiation in the markets' eyes about the health of different financial institutions. Attention is now turning away from liquidity and more towards
Paul Tucker:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008questions of funding and viability of an institutions business plan. And for some institutions that means they are over the worst and for others perhaps not. But I think we've certainly moved some long way down the road.What we haven't seen of course in the UK is that we haven't yet gone through the period of the sharpest slowdown and that will have clearly some impact on the losses which the banking system will see. And the banks have a cushion of capital to absorb losses when there are, as inevitably there are slowdowns in the economy in some periods. And the question will be whether the combination of the losses made on financial instruments in the past year, combined with the capital raising efforts they've made to offset that will still leave them with a sufficient capital cushion to absorb losses from the slowdown in the economy. And that we haven't seen play out yet, so we have to go through that process.But Paul could comment perhaps on the outlook for financial institutions both in the UK and perhaps around the world.I think you've made the big points. I mean first of all I think that the measures that central banks took around the world did underpin - underline that there is a backstop of liquidity available to the international banking system and obviously to this banking system. And that has helped to underpin confidence.The big question ahead and really since the beginning of the year has been whether the affect of the macroeconomic slowdown on arrears and defaults and therefore on the value of loan portfolios would start to occur before banks had more or less completed the process of deleveraging. And I think that process has probably become more difficult than it was say six months ago. And therefore precisely as the Governor says
Claire Jones, Central Banking Publications:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008there is going to a period in which banks differentially, different banks are in different positions around the world. Some of them are going to be constraining their growth probably quite considerably to protect themselves against the affect of the macroeconomic downturn which goes to the question that Sam Fleming asked earlier.But others, not just here but also internationally are in a better position to take advantage of the opportunities that are there in this economy and in others. And I think that frankly makes it very predictable.A key measure for us and other central banks is going to come from the Credit Conditions Surveys that we use, because loan growth and money growth are affected by demand as well as supply. And I think we're going to have to look very carefully at whether the questions which we, the Fed and the ECB ask about lending supply, whether that starts to indicate some relaxation or whether we see further tightening. And I would expect it to be different across different banks and therefore quite difficult to predict the aggregate.I've got a question for the Governor and one for Paul Tucker as well. My question for the Governor is do you think the recent decline in oil prices will continue? And for Paul Tucker my question is, even despite the Central Bank measures that you just discussed, the spreads between OIS swap rates and Libor for the three month sterling loans still remain high. First of all what impact does this have on the Bank’s thinking as regards Monetary Policy and you also said in the last Inflation Report that they could remain high for the foreseeable future, do you still think that this is the case and is there anything that the Bank
Mervyn King:Paul Tucker:Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008is planning to do in the near to medium term to reduce the size of the spreads?I shall let Paul answer that question while I try and scramble around and find a crystal ball that may tell me where oil prices are going.I suppose I'm relieved not to have to predict oil prices. The spreads are still very high and that does make things difficult. I think it's almost certainly the case that the spreads would be a lot higher and things would be even more difficult if the central banks hadn't taken the collective action that we have.But I think one has to not just look at the headline Libor rates or the headline Libor spread to risk free rates that you quote. I think one has to also look at the rates at which companies and banks can borrow themselves. And some of the largest companies are now able to borrow considerably lower than Libor. And that should not be lost sight of. We do not live in a world where every company, every household is having to borrow at a fat spread above Libor.I think Libor rates will probably stay relatively high relative to the policy rate for some time. The financial markets themselves are still predicting that they will edge down over the next year or so. But this is precisely the backdrop to the adjustment in bank balance sheets that we're seeing.And to avoid asking about oil prices I'll merely add to that that I think the extent of unsecured borrowing within the banking system will remain much lower than it was for a long time. I think we're moving to a world in which people are thinking much more now about borrowing on a secured basis.
Paul Wallace, The Economist:Mervyn King:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008I really can't offer you any deep insight into oil prices. But I can probably refer you to some people out there who probably do.The Bank of England along with other central banks has emphasised the importance of inflation expectations. But when they've risen it has tended to rather shift the subject so it says for example the one year ahead have risen so then the central banks have tended to look further ahead. I wonder whether you perhaps set out your thinking on that, particularly since the outcome for core prices will be determined over the next year or so and for example the two year ahead BASIX Barclays measure is also elevated as much as the one year ahead?If you turn to page 34 and look at chart 4.8 you'll see that far from trying to avoid the question we have quite deliberately taken it head on with quite an extended discussion about inflation expectations. I'll just make one comment and then perhaps ask Spencer to explain chart 4.8.It should not be surprising if short term expectations of inflation rise. Our short term expectations of inflation have risen. And a reasonable person would expect inflation to remain high for a while because these increases that we've seen already enter the CPI measure of inflation and stay there for 12 months.The real question is what are expectations about inflation further ahead? And I think there the evidence is less clear, but it's an absolutely fundamental issue and I stressed in my opening remarks and I'll stress again now that inflation expectations are fundamental to our achieving the inflation target and we are determined to do whatever is necessary to ensure that inflation expectations are indeed anchored to the target.
Spencer Dale:Heather Stewart, The Observer:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008But perhaps Spencer could explain chart 4.8 and the comments we make here about inflation expectations.Certainly, so chart 4.8 is sort of designed to get explicitly at this question which the Governor outlined which is it seems perfectly sensible and rational for near term inflation expectations one year ahead to rise. And the key question for us is to what extent people's expectations beyond that near term horizon have also risen. And as you can see - so the way to read chart 4.8 is those diamonds in the top left hand corner are different indicators of the extent to which near term inflation expectations have risen.But as this chart suggests different measures of inflation expectations further out - over a longer horizon seem to have risen by far less. As you point out the Barclays BASIX two year ahead survey has remained elevated and that's indicated by the green diamond to the right.But many other measures, both survey measures, measures derived from financial markets and also measures derived from our survey or external forecasters all suggest longer term - medium term inflation expectations have risen by far less. And I think it's sort of monitoring this extent to which near term inflation expectations spills over into these medium term ones, which is sort of one of the key indicators we're monitoring when we're trying to think about this upside risk.You said in your opening statement Governor that one of the contributors to the recovery in 2009, a year or so time will be an easing in credit supply conditions. Does that mean that you think that the deleveraging process that financial firms are going through will be over by then? And if that's the case should we
Mervyn King:Ian King, The Sun:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008infer that you don't see the need for additional actions such at the extension of the Special Liquidity Scheme to cover new mortgage lending for example?Well the SLS was introduced as a measure to deal with a legacy problem of the illiquidity of the stock of assets which banks owned last year when the crisis hit. So that window will close in October. The longer term issue in terms of tightening of credit conditions is a much wider issue altogether. That is not to do with liquidity. That is to do with the health of the capital position of the banking system and it's very important not to confuse the two.So the question of whether credit conditions will ease as Paul said we're monitoring that extremely close. We will see, I mean we're starting see in some kinds of lending in the mortgage market already a reduction in spreads. The banking system will adjust. But we're certainly not saying something will or will not happen. Our central view is that we'll start to see some easing.But the main downside risk to the output growth profile is precisely that the difficulties in the financial sector and the tightness of credit conditions persist for longer than in the central view and that leads to a downside outlook for both consumption and investment spending. So there are risks there, clearly.Can I ask you about sterling. On page 12 of the report you say that the exchange rate has largely declined because of an increase in the sterling risk premium. I just wondered why you think the risk premium attached to sterling has increased?I don't think we really know. And I think there may have been a period last year where there were concerns about the need for
Ian King, The Sun:Mervyn King:Gary Duncan, The Times:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008the UK to make a significant adjustment; we've seen one in the United States. Not surprising that a country which has also seen rapid growths of domestic demand and a large trade deficit to which we've pointed for many years that at some point that would lead to an adjustment in the exchange rate. And I think that's probably what's happened.But I don't pretend ex ante to know what will happen to exchange rates or I'm afraid even ex post to know precisely why they have moved, but move they have. And one of the factors that we have to take into account is that import prices this year will be 10% higher than they were last year. We have seen nothing like that, nothing on that scale at all since the early 1990s. That is bound to be contributing in some sense to this what we hope will be a temporary rise in inflation.Okay, and secondly you've touched on a possible rise in unemployment, both in this meeting and in the report. I just wonder whether you could elaborate on that, to what extent do you think unemployment is likely to rise over a couple of years?I don't know because a lot will hinge on the reaction and responsiveness both of employers and employees. To the extent that we have a flexible labour market that will undoubtedly reduce the size of the increase in unemployment. But I think it's impossible to put a number on it.Governor, first of all can I go back to Chris Giles' question about the fact of inflation having been slightly above target for a protracted period. As quite a few commentators have highlighted that we've had persistently high services inflation over the last five years, offset by very low goods price inflation
Mervyn King:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008and deflation in some categories of goods. And at the same time that unit wage costs have been growing quite rapidly for quite an extended period now. What proportion of the inflation shock that the economy is suffering do you regard as domestically generated separately from the external problems that you've highlighted in your presentation?Well I think most of the rise that we've seen in recent months has been these external shocks. After all if you're going to hit an inflation target if you are doing that in a period which in the NICE decade we were when there were significant changes in relative prices coming from the world economy, with the prices of manufactured goods which we imported falling relative to the prices of services that was a real factor coming out of changes in the structure of the world economy. That is bound to be reflected if you want to hit an overall inflation target then you will see higher than previously experienced service price inflation and weaker than previously experienced manufacturing price inflation. And that is exactly what we saw.And we pointed out right through that period that it was unlikely to go on forever, that there would be an adjustment when the inflation rate in the services sector would have to come down, when the inflation rate in the manufactured sector would probably pick up and that would be accompanied by a reduction in the trade deficit. We are going through that adjustment process now. And it is never an easy one.But I don't think you should expect that when we hit the inflation target that the prices of everything will move at the same rate. They won't, there are enormous variations in inflation rates across different sectors of the economy. And that will continue to be true.
Gary Duncan, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008Can I do a short follow up please? The other question I want to ask is in terms of the neutral rate, the so called neutral rate of interest rates. Given the tightness of financing conditions and the constraints on credit supply that you've also discussed. Does the Bank and the Committee feel that the neutral rate may have fallen and in that context that 5% rates that we have at present may actually be more restrictive than they would previously have been?Well I think what the Committee is very conscious of is that in order to assess the impact of Monetary Policy and the credit system on the outlook for demand and output and inflation it's no good just looking at the policy rate. You have to look at credit conditions. And that's why we've introduced as Paul described the Credit Conditions Survey. And there is no doubt that for many borrowers the policy rate is not in itself the rate at which people borrow. That has always been true of course and we have always been looking to see how changes in the policy rate mapped into the effective borrowing rates.That was also true remember when we were raising policy rates during '05 and '06 we saw the squeeze on spreads in mortgage markets so that mortgage rates were not rising as quickly as the policy rate.So we have to look at this always in all circumstances. And I think the Committee is very conscious of that which is why when in making a change in the policy rate it looks very carefully and thinks about how that will map through to credit conditions more generally.That isn't something unique to where we are but of course it's particularly important in the present circumstances.
Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Mervyn King:Elliott Gotkin, Bloomberg Television:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008Governor on pages 21 and 22 of the Report you say in the nicest possible way that the fiscal position has pretty much fallen apart. Given that Monetary Policy and Fiscal Policy are supposed to support each other how do you and your colleagues plan to support Fiscal Policy and do you know what is the Fiscal Policy you're supposed to be supporting?Well the next statement of fiscal policy will be make presumably in the pre Budget report, but that's for the Chancellor to decide. We will certainly support Fiscal Policy in the sense that our job is to support the medium term framework for fiscal policy. And it is very important that we have a medium term framework for fiscal policy. We have one at present. No doubt the Chancellor will comment on that in the autumn. I see no reason to suppose that the Government has in any way moved away from its strong support for the medium term framework for fiscal policy. And we support it in that.But decisions, discretionary decisions on budgets each year, or fiscal measures are a matter for the Treasury and not a matter for us. Our position is that we stress the need and importance of having a medium term framework for fiscal policy and sticking to it.I know someone touched on this just before about the Special Liquidity Scheme there was a report in The Times this morning talking about it perhaps being extended and also the potential for mortgage backed securities to be guaranteed perhaps on a temporary basis by the Government, at least on the Special Liquidity Scheme which I think was your idea in the first place. Any plans to extend that, is it needed?
Mervyn King:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008No, as I said before the Special Liquidity Scheme was introduced, the scheme itself will continue for some time because we've offered genuine support to swap illiquid assets into liquid assets. And the window for that closes in October, but the support, that continuing swap will continue for up to a period of three years. So that's a significant support.I think there is a very big confusion in much of the discussion about the mortgage market. The issue about the mortgage market is not liquidity; it's not a question of having illiquid assets and being able to swap them into liquid ones. The issue about the mortgage market is whether the business model of some of the mortgage lenders needs to be adjusted and whether there is sufficient sources of funding to supply mortgage lending.Funding is not something that a Central Bank can provide. A Central Bank can swap a stock of assets from liquid to illiquid form; it can't supply funding to finance investment. That has to come by mobilising savings in the economy at home or abroad and transferring that to fund investment. That's what the financial sector is there to do. Some parts of the financial sector may now find themselves in a position where the funding models that they had no longer seem appropriate and need to be adjusted. We are going through a period where a significant adjustment is needed in the financial sector and where the scale of the balance sheet devoted to mortgage lending is not going to go back to where it was in the first half of 2007.On the question of guarantees all I can say is the Federal Reserve, most of our colleagues for the last 30 years have been pointing to the great dangers of offering government guarantees to mortgages. They pointed out that if you offer a government guarantee to a mortgage, remember they spent a very long time
Svenja O'Donnell,Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008trying to press the argument that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were not guaranteed by the Federal Government, they could see the risk that if people believed it then they would be able to attract funds more cheaply than any other source, mortgage funding would go through that source and the Federal Government would end up in a situation where it would find it very difficult to avoid guaranteeing it and that's the problem they find themselves with now.We don’t guarantee lending to other forms of borrowing; we don’t guarantee lending to manufacturing borrowing, there is no reason why in the long run you need to have any guarantee of lending to the mortgage market. And it would be a very dangerous move to move to a situation where the government saw its major role as guaranteeing lending. How can - why should the taxpayer take on the risk of borrowing by individual borrowers some of whom are risky it’s the lenders who should take the risk and assess for themselves the riskiness of that lending.And what we saw in the first half of 2007 was that not enough attention was paid to monitoring the riskiness of that lending. The last thing we want to do is to tell lenders it doesn’t matter if they monitor the riskiness, the Government will guarantee it. So that's not the route to go down.We are going through a difficult adjustment in the housing market. The sooner we can make that adjustment the better. But pretending that there's some magic solution here is not the answer and certainly it is nothing to do with the liquidity as many of you have pointed out very effectively in your own columns.
Bloomberg News:Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008Spencer Dale told the Treasury Select Committee that the bounce back and forecasting model does not account very well for the rationing of credit by banks. How concerned are you about this and what are you doing about it?Well I'm not in the sense that no one model should ever try to model every feature of an economy. That's not what models do. And it’s a great myth to believe that there is some model somewhere in a cupboard or out there which captures what goes on in the economy. It doesn’t, models are a way of helping you to think about the economy and the forecasts we produce are not based on a model, they’re judgements of the committee using many models to reach those judgements.Now we have developed other so called models to enable us to focus on the particular problems of the moment relating to these changes in the credit market. But the idea that one model doesn’t capture everything is to my mind a hallmark of a good model. If anybody came to you and said my model includes everything you could possibly want to know about the world you wouldn't bother to spend another two minutes with them.Just two points, one for clarification. I think in your opening statement you talked about inflation peaking at 5% but in the report on page 39 it talks about the fact that inflation is more likely than not to go above 5% over the coming months. Just wondered whether you could clarify which of those two points you...?What I said was about 5%. And none of us know where it will be. I mean the month to month movements in decisions by utility companies on gas and electricity prices, movements in food prices; I mean food price inflation surprised again on the up
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008side 12% now on a year. We’ve seen falls in oil prices over the last three weeks. I think it’s almost impossible, that will have an impact on petrol prices. I think it’s very hard to make judgements as to precisely where it will peak so we just said about 5%. In other words we wanted to show that there are reasons already within the system for expecting it to go further above where it is as of yesterday.The more important point was on page 41 you talk about net trade making a positive contribution to growth in the central projection. Presumably just logically that means that domestic demand is therefore going to contract over the coming year given that you say that overall the economy is going to be flat. You are presumably therefore projecting a recession in the domestic economy balanced a little bit by a boost from net trade.Well I mean I don’t - you can't take those separate - as you yourself said one of the reasons why net trade will make a positive contribution to growth is because domestic demand will be weak. There will be some contribution to growth from exports because we think that, I mean there is still buoyant growth in much of the world economy in the emerging markets, they have not been affected by the credit crisis in anywhere near the same way. There are signs of slowing around the world in most of the world economy. I would certainly expect to see and indeed I think the world needs to see slower growth in the world economy. We’re seeing overheating in much of the world economy in recent years which is why commodity prices have been pushed up.So we will see some slowing of growth but the fall in sterling, the effect of exchange rate will help to cushion us from some of that effect. So I think we would see some positive contribution to
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Chris Giles, The Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 30 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008growth from exports and that will be exacerbated in terms of net trade by slower growth of domestic demand.Sorry I'm not quite clear. Are you saying that you think domestic demand will contract over the next year or not?I see - we think output will be broadly flat and domestic demand since that's the dominant contribution too will be broadly flat.Governor you just touched on it just there. There seems to be a little bit of a disconnect between central bankers when they talk to domestic audiences and when they talk on an international scale seeing as everyone is currently saying how they're importing inflation from abroad and obviously that can't in aggregate be true. How do you see this playing out that if everyone is saying it's not our fault Guv it's someone else's fault causing inflation in my domestic economy, that will play out in the short term and the medium term too?Well I think this is a very important question and indeed it's one which I raised at the last meeting of Central Bank Governors at the BIS where I said you know each of us have this story and yet the Central Bank Governors of 85% of the world economy is sitting around this room, round the table in quite a small room. So somehow between us we ought to be able to discuss this and think about what is happening to the world economy.But I think the difficulty is that this is a reflection of the fact that the if you like developed economies have got used to a world in which they interacted by having freely floating exchange rates and domestic inflation targets or domestic Monetary Policy orientations. And in that world I think you can argue that you will
Hugh Pym, BBC:Page 31 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008get the right sort of equilibrium for the world as a whole through allowing exchange rates to float.What we've been through in the last five to ten years is the transition to a world economy where a very important part of the world economy wants to have its own Monetary Policy but actually has linked its exchange rate to that of the US dollar. And that creates enormous tensions. And the fact that the US has had low interest rates at the short end and easy Monetary Policy in recent years has meant that so have the Monetary Policies of much of the emerging market world been linked to that. And that's I think led to some overheating and inflation in the emerging market world and a sharp rise in commodity prices.So much of the difficulties we have are in trying to create a conversation among countries about either the need to move to more flexible exchange rates or the need to make adjustments in other ways if countries feel that they do not wish to move away from fixed exchange rates. Maybe thinking of it linking to a basket of currencies.But some conversation of that kind which of course the IMF has tried to generate through its consultation process, its multilateral consultation. Some conversation of that kind I agree is extremely important for the world economy and the Bank of England has I think been in the forefront of trying to encourage that kind of conversation and I think it will be increasingly important in the years to come.You paint a pretty bleak picture of the economy for next year, high inflation and the possibility of a recession. How bad is it going to get for British households?
Mervyn King:Katie Hope, City A.M.:Mervyn King:Page 32 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008I don’t think - we’re painting what we think is a realistic picture, a broadly flat output, somewhat higher inflation but peaking at that level. And then, and this is the important point don’t just focus on the next year, I was very careful to say we will come through it, inflation will come down and we will resume a normal pattern of economic growth.But there's no point pretending that what is happening in the world economy with this unique combination of higher food and energy prices on the one hand and a sharp dislocation in the financial sector on the other is going to do anything other than make the next year a difficult and painful adjustment for the UK economy. That was something which hit us from the outside. We now need to accept that adjustment and respond to it and the MPC will do its best to try to ensure that inflation will come back to the target and we will return to what I described as the not so bad decade.I've got two questions. First one was previously you've suggested that people in the regions are more cheery than people in London and if you visit the regions you get a less gloomy picture on the economy, and do you think that's still the case? And the second one the picture you describe suggests the only option for the MPC is to hold rates for the foreseeable future. Is that true?Well on the first one there are mixed pictures between different sectors of the economy. And once you get outside the financial sector in the City of London where the gloom is clearly influenced by what is happening to the necessary adjustment in the financial sector then the picture looks rather different, but it does depend on which sector you’re in.
Jenny Scott: ENDPage 33 Quarterly Inflation Report - 13th August 2008And on Monetary Policy the Monetary Policy Committee has complete flexibility to do whatever it thinks is appropriate to interest rates. And I can assure you we have not set in tablets of stone the future path of interest rates. We will look very carefully and monitor the new information as it comes in and make the judgement that we need to make to bring inflation back to the target each and every month and that's not news.And we’ve run out of time. Thank you all very much for coming.