Inflation Report
February 2016
On 9 May 2016, two errors were corrected. In Table 5.A, the February conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward market
interest rates reported for 2017 Q1, 2018 Q1 and 2018 Q4, was 0.1 percentage points, on the rounding, higher than that
underpinning the MPC’s forecasts. In Table 5.C, the near-term projection for four-quarter PPP-weighted emerging-economy
growth erroneously quoted the projection for UK-weighted emerging-economy growth.
BANK OF ENGLAND
Inflation Report
February 2016
In order to maintain price stability, the Government has set the Bank’s Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) a target for the annual inflation rate of the Consumer Prices Index of 2%.
Subject to that, the MPC is also required to support the Government’s economic policy,
including its objectives for growth and employment.
The Inflation Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of
the Monetary Policy Committee. It serves two purposes. First, its preparation provides a
comprehensive and forward-looking framework for discussion among MPC members as an aid
to our decision-making. Second, its publication allows us to share our thinking and explain the
reasons for our decisions to those whom they affect.
Although not every member will agree with every assumption on which our projections are
based, the fan charts represent the MPC’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths
for inflation, output and unemployment, as well as the uncertainties surrounding those central
projections.
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998.
The Monetary Policy Committee:
Mark Carney, Governor
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy
Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability
Nemat Shafik, Deputy Governor responsible for markets and banking
Kristin Forbes
Andrew Haldane
Ian McCafferty
Gertjan Vlieghe
Martin Weale
The Inflation Report is available in PDF alongside PowerPoint‰ versions of the charts and
Excel spreadsheets of the data underlying most of them at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/2016/feb.aspx.

 Monetary Policy Summary i
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.1 Developments in asset prices 1
1.2 Global economic developments 6
Box Monetary policy since the November Report 3
Box What is the impact of capital flows on the outlook for emerging economies? 7
2 Demand and output 10
2.1 Output 11
2.2 Domestic demand 11
2.3 UK net trade 17
Box Conditions in credit and financial markets 14
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.1 Labour market developments 19
3.2 Productivity and capacity utilisation 21
3.3 Overall slack in the economy 24
3.4 Wages 24
Box Recent developments in average hours worked 22
4 Costs and prices 26
4.1 Consumer price developments 26
4.2 Near-term cost pressures 27
4.3 Medium-term cost pressures 28
4.4 Inflation expectations and other nominal indicators 30
5 Prospects for inflation 32
5.1 Key judgements and risks 34
5.2 The projections for demand, unemployment and inflation 41
Box Other forecasters’ expectations 42
Index of charts and tables 43
Glossary and other information 45
Contents

 Monetary Policy Summary i
Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet the
2% inflation target and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its
meeting ending on 3 February 2016, the MPC voted unanimously to maintain Bank Rate at
0.5%. The Committee also voted unanimously to maintain the stock of purchased assets
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves at £375 billion.
In December, twelve-month CPI inflation stood at 0.2%, almost 2 percentage points below the inflation target.
Oil prices were more than a third lower, in sterling terms, than a year earlier. Together with muted growth in world
prices, the appreciation of sterling since early 2013 has pulled down on import prices more broadly. Overall, these
factors can explain the vast majority of the deviation of inflation from the target in December, and to an even greater
extent than at the time of the November Inflation Report. The remainder of the undershoot reflects subdued domestic
cost growth, particularly unit labour costs.
Returning inflation to the 2% target requires balancing the protracted drags from sterling’s past appreciation and low
growth in world export prices against increases in domestic cost growth. Fully offsetting the drag on inflation from
external factors over the short run would, in the MPC’s judgement, involve too rapid an acceleration in domestic costs,
one that would risk being unsustainable and would lead to undesirable volatility in output and employment. Given these
considerations, the MPC intends to set monetary policy to ensure that growth is sufficient to absorb remaining spare
capacity in a manner that returns inflation to the target in around two years and keeps it there in the absence of further
shocks.
Global growth has fallen back further over the past three months, as emerging economies have generally continued to
slow and as the US economy has grown by less than expected. There have also been considerable falls in the prices of
risky assets and another significant fall in oil prices. The latter appears largely to reflect news about the supply of oil.
Developments in financial markets seem in part to reflect greater weight being placed on the risks to the global outlook
stemming from China and other emerging economies. Looking ahead, growth in the United Kingdom’s main trading
partners should continue to be supported by the boost to real incomes from low commodity prices, and to some degree
by monetary and fiscal policy. But emerging market economies are likely to grow more slowly than in recent years and
the risks to the MPC’s central projections of only modest global growth lie to the downside.
Although activity growth in the United Kingdom has slowed to slightly below average rates, the domestic private sector
remains resilient. Consumer confidence is robust, supported by a pickup in real income growth, and overall investment
intentions continue to be firm, although a sharp retrenchment in capital spending in the oil and gas sector is under way.
GDP is expected to grow at around average rates over the forecast period as a tighter labour market and rising
productivity support real incomes and consumption.
The MPC has revised down its estimate of the level of potential supply broadly in line with the lower level of demand.
Resilient private domestic demand growth is expected to produce sufficient momentum to eliminate the limited margin
of spare capacity during the course of this year. However, wage growth has been weaker than anticipated and labour
costs are expected to rise a little less quickly than thought at the time of the November Inflation Report, contributing to a
slower recovery in inflation. In part that reflects the MPC’s expectation that low realised inflation will continue to
moderate the increase in wage pressure in the near term. The mechanical return to higher rates of inflation as past falls
in energy prices drop from the annual comparison, supported by the recent fall in the sterling exchange rate and some
additional stimulus from lower market interest rates, should in time reverse this effect and support wage gains. The MPC
judges that inflation expectations remain well anchored, though it remains watchful for signs that low inflation is having
more persistent second-round effects on wages. 
ii Inflation Report February 2016
The scale of recent commodity price falls means that CPI inflation is likely to remain below 1% until the end of the year.
As the drags from energy and other imported goods unwind, however, domestic cost pressures are projected to build up
sufficiently such that, conditioned on the path for Bank Rate implied by market interest rates, CPI inflation is likely to
exceed the 2% target slightly at the two-year point and then rise further above it. This central projection for inflation is
modestly below that of three months ago for much of the forecast period but broadly similar by the end. The MPC
judges the risks to the central projection to be skewed a little to the downside in the near term, reflecting the possibility
of greater persistence of low inflation.
There are significant judgements underlying these projections and a range of views among MPC members about the
balance of risks to inflation relative to the best collective judgement presented in the February Inflation Report. At its
meeting ending on 3 February, the MPC judged it appropriate to leave the stance of monetary policy unchanged. The
MPC judges it more likely than not that Bank Rate will need to increase over the forecast period to ensure inflation
remains likely to return to the target in a sustainable fashion.
All members agree that, given the likely persistence of the headwinds weighing on the economy, when Bank Rate does
begin to rise, it is expected to do so more gradually and to a lower level than in recent cycles. This guidance is an
expectation, not a promise. The actual path Bank Rate will follow over the next few years will depend on the economic
circumstances.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 1
Since November, the US Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) has raised interest rates, while the European Central
Bank (ECB) has eased policy (Chart 1.1). In the
United Kingdom, market prices imply a slower pace of
Bank Rate rises than at the time of the November Report.
Reflecting falls against a range of currencies, including the
US dollar and the euro, the sterling ERI has depreciated by
around 3½% (Section 1.1).
In other financial markets, volatility and risk premia have risen,
possibly reflecting concerns about the outlook for emerging
market economies (EMEs) and potential spillovers to advanced
economies. For example, UK equity prices have fallen by 7%
since the November Report. While concerns about demand
have also weighed on oil prices, increased supply prospects are
likely to have been a significant driver of the falls seen since
November. Those falls will boost real incomes in
commodity-importing economies, but exert a drag on activity
in commodity exporters (Section 1.2).
UK-weighted world GDP growth remained subdued in
2015 Q3, in line with expectations in November. EME growth
continued at a slower pace than in recent years and activity in
advanced economies continued to expand at a moderate pace
(Section 1.2). In part reflecting recent developments in
financial conditions, however, the outlook for global growth is
slightly weaker (Section 5).
1.1 Developments in asset prices
Monetary policy and interest rates
In the United States, the FOMC increased the target range for
the federal funds rate to between ¼% and ½% in December,
from between 0% and ¼%, where it had been since 2008. As
expectations of the increase firmed in the weeks preceding the
December policy meeting, market interest rates rose. There
was little reaction in financial markets to the decision itself.
Market interest rates have since fallen back as financial
1 Global economic and financial
developments
Since the November Report, the ECB has eased policy further and the FOMC has raised interest rates.
In the United Kingdom, the market-implied path for Bank Rate is lower than that in the run-up to the
November Report and the sterling ERI has depreciated by 3½%. Oil prices have fallen substantially
since November, to around US$29 per barrel. Financial market volatility rose and UK equity prices
fell significantly, alongside those in the United States and the euro area. UK-weighted world
GDP growth remained subdued in 2015 Q3, in line with expectations in November.
Table 1.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in November Developments since November
Global GDP growth Slightly weaker than expected
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average
a little below ½%. Inflation expected
to begin to pick up in the coming
months.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a
little above ½%; PCE inflation to remain
weak in the coming months but is
expected to pick up in 2016 H1.
• Average four-quarter PPP-weighted
emerging-economy growth of around
4%; Chinese GDP growth to average
around 6½%.
• Euro-area GDP rose by 0.3% in Q3.
Inflation rose to 0.4% in January 2016,
but the near-term outlook is weaker than
in November.
• US GDP rose by 0.2% in Q4, following
growth of 0.5% in Q3. PCE inflation
was 0.4% in December.
• Emerging-economy GDP growth was
4.1% in Q3. Chinese GDP growth was
6.8% in Q4.
Commodity prices and the exchange rate Oil prices much lower; sterling lower
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to
evolve in line with the conditioning
assumptions.
• US dollar oil prices are around 40%
lower. The sterling ERI depreciated by
around 3½%.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
2013 14 15 16 17 18 19
Per cent
Solid lines: February Report
Dashed lines: November Report
Federal funds rate(b)
Bank Rate
ECB main refinancing rate
ECB deposit rate Euro area
United Kingdom
United States
+
–
Chart 1.1 The market-implied path for Bank Rate is
lower than in November
International forward interest rates(a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, European Central Bank (ECB) and Federal Reserve.
(a) The February 2016 and November 2015 curves are estimated using instantaneous
forward overnight index swap rates in the fifteen working days to 27 January 2016 and
28 October 2015 respectively.
(b) Upper bound of the target range.
2 Inflation Report February 2016
market volatility increased, and the implied pace of rises in
the federal funds rate is slower than in the run-up to the
November Report (Chart 1.1).
In the euro area, the ECB left the main refinancing rate
unchanged, but cut the deposit rate by a further 10 basis
points to -0.3% in December (Chart 1.1). The duration of its
asset purchase programme was also extended. Monthly
purchases are now intended to run until the end of
March 2017 — six months longer than originally announced —
or beyond, until a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
takes place. The ECB also announced it would reinvest
principal payments as purchased bonds matured and that
purchases would be extended to regional and local
government bonds.
While the scale of the ECB’s easing was more modest than had
been anticipated by market participants immediately prior to
the decision, prompting falls in asset prices on the day of the
announcement, that only partly unwound the rises that had
occurred over the previous few weeks during which
expectations of the change had built. Overall, the change in
ECB policy is likely to have supported asset prices in the
euro area and in other countries whose assets investors judge
to be close substitutes, such as the United Kingdom. The
market-implied path for euro interest rates is lower than at
the time of the November Report, with market participants
placing a significant weight on further easing in March.
In the United Kingdom, the market-implied path for Bank Rate
reaches 1.1% in 2019 Q1, around 20 basis points lower than in
the run-up to the November Report. According to market
contacts, this is likely to reflect market participants’ concerns
that weaker global growth could weigh on the UK outlook.
The box on page 3 discusses the factors behind the Monetary
Policy Committee’s (MPC’s) decisions in December and
January, while the factors underpinning the Committee’s
February decision are set out in the Monetary Policy Summary
on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail in the Minutes
of the meeting.
Ten-year spot government bond yields in the United States,
the United Kingdom and the euro area have been broadly
unchanged since the November Report. Similarly, the implied
inflation rate for five to ten years ahead in the
United Kingdom has changed little (Section 4).
Exchange rates
In China, the renminbi continued to depreciate against the
US dollar (Chart 1.2). Market contacts suggest this may in
part have been associated with increased concerns about the
extent of the slowdown in China. But the renminbi
trade-weighted index — on which the Chinese authorities have
recently placed greater emphasis, and which is likely to be
more important for the overall outlook for Chinese trade —
has fallen by less and remains close to its level a year ago.
85
90
95
100
105
Jan. July Jan. July Jan.
Indices: 10 August 2015 = 100
Renminbi
 trade-weighted
 index(a)
Renminbi-US dollar
 exchange rate
November Report
2014 15 16
Chart 1.2 The Chinese renminbi has continued to
depreciate against the US dollar
Renminbi exchange rates
Sources: Bloomberg, China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) and Bank calculations.
(a) Calculated as a weighted average of end-day spot bilateral exchange rates, using weights
published by the CFETS.
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
November Report
$/£
€/£
Sterling ERI
Chart 1.3 Sterling has depreciated against both the
US dollar and the euro since November
Sterling exchange rates
+
–
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Jan. July Jan. July Jan.
Greater weight on
 sterling appreciation
Greater weight on
 sterling depreciation
£ versus $
£ versus €
November Report
2014 15 16
Chart 1.4 Option prices point to an increasing weight on
the risk of a sterling depreciation over the next year
Option-implied asymmetries for selected bilateral exchange
rates(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Twelve-month measure. Option-implied asymmetries are measured by the skewness of the
distribution of twelve-month foreign exchange returns implied by options price data.
Returns are defined as the logarithmic difference between current forward rates and the
spot rate.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 3
Monetary policy since the November Report
The MPC’s central projection in the November Report, under
the assumptions that Bank Rate followed a path implied by
market interest rates and that the stock of purchased assets
remained at £375 billion, was that private domestic demand
would continue to grow at above-average rates, such that
four-quarter GDP growth would remain around 2½% over the
forecast period. CPI inflation was expected to remain below
1% until the second half of 2016, then rise to the 2% target in
the second half of 2017 and above it in 2018.
At its meeting ending on 9 December, the MPC noted that
domestic and international activity data had generally been
consistent with expectations in the November Report.
Measures announced in the Government’s Autumn Statement
meant a slightly slower pace of deficit reduction in 2016 than
previously planned. The prices of oil and some other
commodities had fallen markedly on the month, which was
thought in large part to reflect supply conditions.
CPI inflation had remained at -0.1% in October, as expected.
The lower price of oil increased the likelihood that headline
inflation rates would remain subdued in the near term. In
addition, nominal wage growth had levelled off. Average
hours worked had been lower than expected, however, which
might have explained some of the flattening off in pay growth,
with changes in the composition of employment an additional
factor. To the extent that these were reflected in productivity
as well as pay, their implications for inflation were likely to be
small. A third potential factor behind weak pay growth was
the low level of CPI inflation seen during the course of the
year, which may have fed into pay negotiations.
Eight Committee members considered the current stance of
monetary policy to be appropriate. For one member, the risks
around domestic cost growth were to the upside, and were
sufficient to justify an immediate increase in Bank Rate.
Data regarding international activity ahead of the MPC
meeting ending on 13 January had evolved broadly as
expected. The main international developments had been in
commodities and financial markets. Concerns about activity
in some emerging market economies had led to volatility in
financial markets. Oil prices had fallen further, which in
addition to news about oil supply also appeared to reflect
demand news stemming from emerging economies. The
sterling exchange rate index had fallen by around 3% since the
November Report.
UK GDP data had been revised down a little and suggested
that after faster growth over the previous two years, growth
had been steady during 2015 at a little below its past average
rate. The latest survey data had painted a mixed picture.
Reflecting both the revised official data and the latest surveys,
and despite the prospective boost to GDP from the latest oil
price falls, Bank staff had lowered their central projections for
GDP growth in Q4 and Q1.
CPI inflation had increased to 0.1% in November, in line with
expectations, although further falls in energy prices meant
that it was expected to increase slightly more gradually than
projected in November. Different signals were being sent by
data on wages and employment about the outlook for
domestic costs. Wage growth had eased by significantly more
than the MPC had anticipated in November, while
employment growth had recovered strongly since mid-2015
and the unemployment rate was a touch lower than expected.
Overall, unit labour costs had appeared to be a little below the
level anticipated at the time of the November Report.
For eight members, the current stance of monetary policy
remained appropriate in order to achieve the Committee’s aim
of returning inflation sustainably to the target in around
two years’ time. For one member, the risks to domestic cost
growth remained to the upside and, given the recent
depreciation of sterling, were less likely to be offset by the
drag from the earlier sterling appreciation. Together, these
were sufficient to justify an immediate increase in Bank Rate.
The policy decision at the meeting ending on 3 February, and
the factors behind that decision, are set out in the Monetary
Policy Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail
in the Minutes of the meeting.(1)
(1) The Minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2016/feb.pdf.
In the United Kingdom, the ERI has depreciated by 3½% since
the November Report. The fall was broad-based, with declines
of nearly 7% against the US dollar and over 3% against the
euro (Chart 1.3). That represents a shift from the trends seen
since late 2014, when an appreciation against the euro more
than offset a depreciation against the dollar. In part, the
recent decline in sterling could reflect strength in the euro
following the announcement by the ECB of less easing than
had been anticipated by market participants.
4 Inflation Report February 2016
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2006 09 12 15
Non-OPEC excluding
 United States
United States
OPEC
Total (per cent)
Percentage points
Chart 1.6 Robust oil supply over the past two years was
driven by growth in US and OPEC output
Contributions to annual growth in oil supply
Sources: International Energy Agency Oil Market Report© OECD/IEA 2016 and
Bank calculations.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
Oil price(a)
February 2016 Report
 futures curve(b)
February 2015 Report
 futures curve(b)
November 2015 Report
 futures curve(b)
August 2014 Report
 futures curve(b)
US$ per barrel
November Report
Chart 1.5 Oil prices have fallen further since the
November Report
US dollar oil prices
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time.
(b) Averages during the fifteen working days to 27 January 2016, 28 October 2015,
4 February 2015 and 6 August 2014 respectively.
40
70
100
130
160
220
250
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Jan. July Jan. July Jan.
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
November Report
S&P 500
 (right-hand scale)
FTSE All-Share
 (right-hand scale)
Euro Stoxx
 (right-hand scale)
MSCI Emerging Markets
 (right-hand scale)
Shanghai Composite
 (left-hand scale)
2014 15 16
Index: 2 January 2014 = 100
190
Chart 1.7 Equity prices have fallen markedly
International equity prices(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) In local currency terms, except for MSCI Emerging Markets, which is in US dollar terms.
Another factor that market contacts suggest may be weighing
on sterling is uncertainty about the implications of the
referendum on EU membership, which they expect to be held
later this year. Since November, option prices suggest that
the weight market participants place on a significant
depreciation of sterling against the euro and the dollar over
the next year, relative to an appreciation, has increased
(Chart 1.4). The current levels of these option-implied
asymmetries are close to those seen around the time of the
Scottish independence referendum in September 2014.
Commodity prices
The Brent crude spot oil price was US$29 per barrel in the
run-up to the February Report, a fall of US$19 per barrel
since the run-up to the November Report, and nearly 75%
lower than its peak in June 2014. As the spot price has fallen,
the futures curve, on which the MPC’s forecast is conditioned,
has also shifted down, reaching US$47 in three years’ time,
compared with US$62 at the time of the November Report
(Chart 1.5). The drag from lower petrol prices on
UK CPI inflation in 2016 is consequently projected to be larger
than anticipated three months ago (Section 4).
As discussed in previous Reports, the overall implications for
UK growth of a supply-driven decline in oil prices tend to be
more positive than a fall in oil prices associated with a
weakening in world, and hence oil, demand (Section 1.2).
Developments in oil supply are likely to have accounted for
much of the fall in oil prices since June 2014 and more
recently. Oil supply growth over the past two years has been
above average rates, initially driven by rises in US output, with
OPEC production playing a bigger role more recently
(Chart 1.6). Since the November Report, expectations of
supply were boosted following the meeting of OPEC
members, which ended without a reduction in the OPEC
official production ceiling. Market contacts suggest that
another factor increasingly weighing on oil prices has been the
prospect of increases in Iranian oil supply, following the
suspension of trade sanctions in January.
Demand factors, however, are also likely to have contributed
to some of the decline in oil prices since November. Volatility
in Chinese equity prices and the exchange rate have recently
tended to be accompanied by falls in the prices of oil and
other commodities: industrial metals prices have fallen by
11% and agricultural commodities by 4% since the
November Report.
Corporate capital markets
UK, US and euro-area equity prices have dropped by around
7% since the run-up to the November Report (Chart 1.7). In
part, this reflects declines in the equity prices of companies in
the mining and quarrying sector, which have fallen alongside
commodity prices. In the United Kingdom, for example,
equity prices for these companies have fallen by around 25%
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 5
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
May July Sep. Nov. Jan.
Consumer services (9%)
Manufacturing (29%)
Business services (15%) Mining and quarrying (14%)
Construction (3%)
Financials (26%)
FTSE All-Share
Indices: 4 May 2015 = 100
November Report
2015 16
Chart 1.8 Equity prices of companies in energy-related
sectors have fallen the most
UK equity indices for selected sectors(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Sectors capture around 96% of the FTSE All-Share. Sectoral indices are calculated as an
average of sub-indices of the FTSE All-Share, weighted by daily shares in market
capitalisation. The weight of each sector in the FTSE All-Share is shown in parentheses.
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2011 12 13 14 15 16
Difference from average since 2003 (number of standard deviations)
November Report
Chart 1.9 Financial market uncertainty has risen
Implied volatility for US equity prices(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) VIX measure of 30-day implied volatility of the S&P 500 equity index.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2012 13 14 15 16
Percentage points Percentage points
Dashed lines: investment-grade
 spreads (right-hand scale)
November Report High-yield (£)
 (left-hand scale)
High-yield (€)
 (left-hand scale)
High-yield (US$)
 (left-hand scale)
Chart 1.10 Corporate bond spreads have widened
International corporate bond spreads(a)
Source: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research.
(a) Spreads over government bond yields. Investment-grade corporate bond spreads are
calculated using an index of bonds with a rating of BBB3 or above. High-yield corporate
bond spreads are calculated using aggregate indices of bonds rated lower than BBB3. Due to
monthly index rebalancing, movements in spreads at the end of each month might reflect
changes in the population of securities within the indices.
since the November Report (Chart 1.8), accounting for around
half of the fall in the overall index.
Part of the fall in equity prices may also reflect rising
perceptions of risks to global demand. Emerging market
equity prices have also fallen since the November Report, with
the emerging market MSCI index down by 17%, and Chinese
equity prices down by 11% (Chart 1.7). Those falls are likely to
signal investors’ increased perceptions of downside risks to the
outlook for emerging economies, which may also weigh on
advanced-economy growth. Consistent with that, the
VIX measure of implied equity price volatility — a measure of
financial market uncertainty — has risen, but remains below
levels seen in August 2015 (Chart 1.9).
Corporate bond spreads — the compensation that investors
require for holding risky corporate bonds, instead of
government bonds — have widened since the
November Report. This was most notable for so-called
‘high-yield’ bonds, those issued by companies with lower
credit ratings. Dollar-denominated high-yield bond spreads
have widened by 1.6 percentage points, with smaller pickups
for sterling and euro-denominated high-yield bonds
(Chart 1.10). Spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds,
those issued by companies with higher credit ratings, are also
wider than in mid-2015, with dollar and euro-denominated
spreads up slightly since November.
While some of the recent widening in corporate bond spreads
is likely to have reflected heightened perceptions of risks to
the outlook, a number of other factors have also played a role.
Much of the widening in dollar-denominated high-yield
corporate bond spreads has been driven by bonds issued by
commodity-related companies, following further commodity
price falls. Market contacts also report that concerns about
the resilience of corporate balance sheets more broadly, given
the increases in leverage in recent years, may have contributed
to wider spreads. In addition, wider investment-grade spreads
may have reflected a reappraisal of liquidity conditions in
secondary markets alongside strong primary market issuance.
These wider spreads will have pushed up the cost of capital
for some companies, although they will have been partly
offset by recent falls in reference rates. Although
sterling-denominated corporate bond spreads have widened
by less, conditions in dollar and euro corporate bond
markets are more important for UK companies, as
sterling-denominated bond issuance is a small proportion of
their total issuance. In 2015, dollar and euro-denominated
issuance accounted for over three quarters of gross bond
issuance by UK private non-financial corporations.
6 Inflation Report February 2016
+
–
1
0
1
2
3
4
Average
2000–07
2012 13 14 15(c)
Percentage points
United States
Euro area
Other advanced economies
China
Other emerging economies
UK-weighted world GDP(b)
 (per cent)
Chart 1.11 World GDP growth was unchanged in 2015
as faster advanced-economy growth offset slower
EME growth
Contributions to calendar-year growth in UK-weighted world GDP(a)
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update January 2016, OECD, Thomson Reuters
Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Constructed using data for countries’ real GDP growth rates weighted according to their
shares in UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the latest observation is 2015 Q3.
For those countries where data for 2015 Q3 are not yet available, data are assumed to be
consistent with projections in the IMF WEO Update January 2016.
(b) Weighted average of GDP growth rates for 146 countries.
(c) As data for 2015 Q4 for many countries are not available, growth rates for 2015 have been
calculated using the first three quarters of 2015 relative to the same three quarters in 2014.
Table 1.B Inflation is weak across countries
Inflation rates in selected countries and regions
Per cent
 Monthly averages 2015 2016
 1998– 2014 2015 2015 Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan.
 2007 H1 Q3
Annual headline consumer price inflation
United Kingdom 1.6 1.5 0.1 0.0 -0.1 0.1 0.2 n.a.
Euro area(a) 2.0 0.4 -0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4
United States(b) 2.0 1.4 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.4 n.a.
UK-weighted
world inflation(c) 2.0 1.0 0.4 0.5 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Annual consumer price inflation excluding food and energy(d)
United Kingdom 1.2 1.6 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.4 n.a.
Euro area(a) 1.6 0.8 0.7 0.9 1.1 0.9 0.9 1.0
United States(b) 1.8 1.5 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.4 n.a.
Sources: Eurostat, IMF WEO Update January 2016, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream, US Bureau of Economic
Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) Data point for January 2016 is a flash estimate.
(b) Personal consumption expenditure price index inflation. Data point for December 2015 is a preliminary
estimate.
(c) Constructed using data for consumption deflators for 51 countries weighted according to their shares in
UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the latest observation is 2015 Q3. For those countries
where data for 2015 Q3 are not yet available, data are assumed to be consistent with projections in the
IMF WEO Update January 2016.
(d) For the euro area and the United Kingdom, excludes energy, food, alcoholic beverages and tobacco. For the
United States, excludes food and energy.
1.2 Global economic developments
Global growth and inflation
Global growth has been muted in recent years, reflecting a
slowing in EME growth and below-average growth in advanced
economies. UK-weighted world GDP growth in the
four quarters to 2015 Q3 was 2.2%, as expected in November.
UK-weighted world trade growth, however, was weaker than
expected, in part reflecting falls in Chinese imports. Both
world GDP and world trade growth are likely to have slowed
in Q4.
Although global growth in 2015 is expected to have been
broadly similar to that in 2014, EMEs have made a smaller, and
advanced economies a larger, contribution than in previous
years (Chart 1.11). In part, the smaller EME contribution
reflects a slowing in growth in commodity exporters
associated with the past falls in oil prices. Further falls in
commodity prices since November are therefore projected to
drag further on activity in commodity-exporting economies.
While the falls in oil prices should impart a boost to
advanced-economy activity growth, that is likely to be partly
offset by the impact of slowing EME growth. The recent falls
in asset prices and associated tightening in financial conditions
mean that the outlook for world GDP growth is slightly
weaker than in November (Section 5).
Past falls in oil and other commodity prices have dragged
directly on headline inflation rates across many countries
(Table 1.B), and are likely to have depressed prices of
internationally traded goods by reducing production and
transport costs. Annual UK-weighted world export price
inflation, excluding fuel, was -0.9% in Q3, which will weigh on
UK inflation (Section 4).
Emerging market economies
Growth in EMEs has slowed significantly since 2010.
Four-quarter PPP-weighted EME growth was 4.1% in 2015 Q3,
compared with a rate of 7.5% in 2010, and growth looks set
to slow further in Q4. While Chinese growth, at 6.8%
(Table 1.C), was slightly higher than expected in Q4, activity
appears to have been weaker than expected in Russia and
Brazil.
Falls in asset prices, as well as rises in US short-term interest
rates, have contributed to a tightening in financial conditions
across EMEs over the past year, as capital outflows have
intensified. As discussed in the box on page 7, this has led to
tighter bank lending conditions in those countries, which is
likely to have weighed on economic activity.
In addition, the significant falls in both oil and non-oil
commodity prices since Summer 2014 have been associated
with a sharper slowdown in commodity-exporting economies
than had been anticipated a year ago, and have exacerbated
existing vulnerabilities in Brazil and Russia.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 7
What is the impact of capital flows on the
outlook for emerging economies?
As emerging market economies (EMEs) have become more
important in the global economy, their growth prospects
increasingly matter for the UK outlook. One important factor
that will both reflect and, in turn, influence those prospects is
the pattern of international capital flows. Having been robust
over most of the recent past, net private sector capital flows
into EMEs have slowed sharply since 2013 (Chart A). While
official data from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for
2015 H2 are not yet available, more timely estimates from the
Institute of International Finance (IIF) indicate that there were
net private sector capital outflows from EMEs in 2015 as a
whole. This would be the first annual net outflow since 1988.
That mainly reflects large net outflows from China. This box
explores the recent drivers of capital flows to EMEs, and their
potential implications for the economic outlook.
International capital flows arise because companies and
households seek to invest in destinations with the highest
perceived return, to diversify their portfolios and to smooth
their spending over time. As a result, capital flows tend to be
driven by relative growth and interest rate prospects. But as
some investments are riskier than others, they will also be
driven by shifts in the perception of, and appetite for, risk.
EME growth has persistently disappointed in recent years and
may have led investors to reappraise the outlook for, and risks
around, their medium-term growth prospects. That is likely to
have weighed on net capital flows into EMEs in recent years
(Chart A). In particular, market contacts report that slowing
growth in China, together with concerns about possible
further depreciation of the renminbi, have prompted
significant private capital outflows from China since 2014 H2.
Capital flows to EMEs are also likely to have been influenced
by developments in advanced economies. In the years
immediately following the crisis, very low advanced-economy
interest rates led investors to seek higher yields elsewhere, and
net capital flows into EMEs picked up sharply (Chart A). Some
of those flows have subsequently unwound, and expectations
of rises in the US federal funds rate may have driven some
outflows from EMEs during 2015.
As well as reflecting the outlook, capital flows will also, in
turn, influence financial conditions and activity, and so they
can be a self-reinforcing mechanism. Net capital flows into
EMEs in 2010–11 are likely to have boosted activity there by
pushing up private sector asset prices and lowering the cost of
financing for companies. Conversely, recent net outflows have
been associated with a tightening in financial conditions: for
example, equity prices have fallen (Section 1.1). According to
an IIF survey of EME banks, a deterioration in funding
conditions has contributed to a tightening in overall bank
lending conditions over 2015 (Chart B). Those rises in the cost
of credit for households and businesses will weigh on activity.
Partly offsetting that, however, capital outflows are likely to
have driven currency depreciation in some countries. That
should support net trade, although it could increase the cost
of servicing dollar-denominated debt.
Looking ahead, a further deterioration in risk sentiment could
lead to an intensification in capital outflows from EMEs,
resulting in a more severe slowing in activity growth. As
discussed in the December 2015 Financial Stability Report,
although some risks remain, EMEs appear to be better placed
to deal with such outflows now than during previous episodes
of reversals in capital flows, such as the East Asian crisis in the
late 1990s.(1)
+
–
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2007 09 11 13 15
Per cent
IMF quarterly net capital flows(b)
Real GDP growth(a)
IIF calendar-year net capital flows(b)(c)
Chart A Net capital flows into EMEs have slowed since 2013
EME GDP growth and net capital flows
Sources: IIF, IMF WEO October 2015 and Bank calculations.
(a) Constructed using real GDP growth rates for 147 countries weighted according to their
shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights. Percentage
change on a year earlier.
(b) Capital inflows to EMEs less capital outflows from EMEs, excluding changes in reserves and
including errors and omissions. Percentages of nominal GDP.
(c) Based on data for 30 EMEs. The observation for 2015 is an IIF estimate based on partial data.
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
2010 11 12 13 14 15
All emerging
 economies
Africa and
 Middle East
Latin America
Emerging
 Europe Emerging
 Asia
Indices
Chart B Lending conditions have tightened across EMEs
EME bank lending conditions(a)
Source: IIF.
(a) Diffusion indices, where a balance of 50 indicates neutral conditions, and a lower (higher)
balance indicates tighter (looser) conditions.
(1) For further discussion, including of the Bank of England’s 2015 stress-test results,
which assessed the UK banking system’s resilience to a severe downturn in EMEs, see
pages 16–19 of the December 2015 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/dec.pdf.
Another factor weighing on EME growth is likely to have been
the changing pattern of demand in China. China has been
rebalancing demand away from investment and towards
household consumption, and export growth has also slowed.
As investment and exports are relatively more
import-intensive, this rebalancing process has been associated
with slowing import growth, and imports fell during 2015
(Chart 1.12). A continued rebalancing in Chinese demand is
likely to weigh on the demand for imports from the rest of the
world, particularly from other EMEs.
Another influence that is likely to have had a persistent effect
on growth in EMEs is the slowing pace of population growth
and an increase in the proportion of retired people in those
countries. The IMF projects that working-age population
growth will average 0.6% a year during 2015–20, compared
with a rate of 1.5% during 2002–07.
As in November, four-quarter growth in EMEs is projected to
recover from current rates as some of the factors that are
weighing on activity wane, but to remain below rates seen
prior to 2010, as rebalancing in China proceeds and
demographic shifts continue. Further falls in commodity
prices since November are expected to weigh on activity in
commodity-exporting economies, although they will boost
real incomes in commodity-importing countries, helping to
support overall EME activity.
Downside risks to the outlook remain, however. In China, the
authorities continue to face the challenges of maintaining
growth while liberalising and rebalancing the economy in the
face of large increases in indebtedness in recent years.
Elsewhere, further increases in US short-term interest rates
could be associated with an intensification of capital outflows,
and could increase the cost of servicing dollar-denominated
debt — the issuance of which has increased in recent years —
exerting a further drag on EME activity.(1)
Euro area
Euro-area GDP rose by 0.3% in 2015 Q3, a slightly slower
pace than in Q2, and a touch below expectations in the
November Report. Consumption growth remained solid. This
is likely to have been supported by strong real income growth,
reflecting past falls in energy prices. In contrast, net trade
detracted from GDP growth in Q3, following a robust
contribution in Q2. The PMI output survey suggests that
GDP growth is likely to have been a little faster in Q4.
Sizable differences in macroeconomic conditions remain
across euro-area countries: for example, the unemployment
rate is below its pre-crisis average rate in Germany, but
remains elevated in Spain, Portugal and Greece (Chart 1.13).
That suggests that a significant margin of spare capacity
8 Inflation Report February 2016
+
–
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2011 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Fixed-asset
 investment(a)
Exports(b)
Imports(b)
Chart 1.12 Import growth in China has moderated as
export and investment growth have slowed
Trade and investment in China
Sources: CEIC, National Bureau of Statistics of China, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) Real fixed-asset investment. Calendar-year growth rates.
(b) Calculated as the four-quarter growth rate of nominal imports (exports) less the four-quarter
growth rate of the import (export) price index. The observation for 2015 Q4 is an average of
the October and November outturns.
Table 1.C Global growth remained muted in 2015 Q3
GDP in selected countries and regions(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier, annualised
 Averages 2015
 1998– 2012– 2014 H1 Q3 Q4
 2007 13
United Kingdom 2.9 1.9 2.8 1.8 1.8 2.0
Euro area (39%) 2.3 -0.2 0.9 1.9 1.2 n.a.
United States (16%) 3.0 1.9 2.5 2.3 2.0 0.7
China (4%)(b) 10.0 7.7 7.3 7.0 6.9 6.8
Japan (2%) 1.1 1.1 -0.8 2.0 1.0 n.a.
India (2%)(b) n.a. n.a. 7.1 7.3 7.4 n.a.
Russia (1%)(c) 7.8 1.6 -0.7 -4.9 -2.3 n.a.
Brazil (1%) 3.1 2.5 -0.7 -5.6 -6.7 n.a.
UK-weighted world GDP(d) 3.0 1.6 2.1 2.2 2.1 n.a.
Sources: IMF WEO Update January 2016, OECD, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Real GDP measures. Figures in parentheses are shares in UK goods and services exports in 2014.
(b) Data are four-quarter growth. The earliest observation for India is 2012 Q1.
(c) The earliest observation for Russia is 2003 Q2.
(d) See footnotes (a) and (b) to Chart 1.11.
(1) For a discussion of recent developments in emerging economies’ dollar-denominated
debt, see pages 17–19 of the December 2015 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/dec.pdf.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2004 06 08 10 12 14
Euro area
Germany
Greece
Spain
France
Italy
Portugal
Per cent
Chart 1.13 Unemployment rates remain elevated in
some euro-area countries
Unemployment rates in selected euro-area countries(a)
Source: Eurostat.
(a) Final data points shown are for November 2015, with the exception of Greece, for which the
final data point is for October 2015.
+
–
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1994 97 2000 03 06 09 12 15
Differences from averages between 2002 and 2007
(number of standard deviations)
Unemployment rate(c)
Underemployment(b)
Long-term
 unemployment(a)
Chart 1.14 US labour market conditions have tightened
in recent years
US labour market indicators
Sources: US Bureau of Labor Statistics and Bank calculations.
(a) Number of people unemployed for 27 weeks or more as a percentage of total unemployed.
(b) U6 measure, which includes the unemployed, the marginally attached to the workforce and
part-time employed people who are working part-time purely for economic reasons, as a
percentage of the civilian labour force plus all people marginally attached to the workforce.
(c) Percentage of the 16+ civilian labour force.
remains in some countries, which is probably weighing on
inflation. While headline inflation has picked up, rising
from -0.1% in 2015 H1 to 0.4% in January, that has mainly
reflected past falls in food and energy prices beginning to drop
out of the annual rate. Core inflation, which excludes food
and energy, has remained subdued (Table 1.B), particularly in
countries where significant slack remains, such as Greece and
Spain. Further oil price falls mean that inflation is expected to
fall back in the near term, a weaker outlook than in November.
The near-term outlook for euro-area growth has changed little
since the November Report. Demand is expected to be
supported by the further falls in oil prices, ECB policy easing,
and the past depreciation in the euro (Section 5). Greater
fiscal spending associated with increases in the number of
refugees over the past year is also projected to support the
outlook. But the recent slowing in EMEs, and associated falls
in asset prices, is likely to weigh on euro-area growth.
United States
US activity has expanded at a moderate pace in recent years
(Table 1.C). In 2015 Q4, however, GDP rose by only 0.2%,
less than expected, as stockbuilding and net trade exerted a
drag, partly offsetting solid household spending growth.
As demand has expanded, the unemployment rate has fallen
rapidly, reaching 5% in December. That is close to the median
of FOMC members’ estimates of the long-term
unemployment rate. Other labour market indicators have also
improved: for example, the U6 measure of underemployment
— which also includes people discouraged from searching for
work and those working part-time for economic reasons —
and the share of the long-term unemployed in overall
unemployment have both fallen towards their historical
averages (Chart 1.14).(1) This improvement, which suggests
that the margin of spare capacity has diminished significantly
in recent years, prompted the FOMC to increase interest rates
in December (Section 1.1). Although nominal wage growth has
been subdued, the significant slowing in productivity growth in
recent years — from average rates of around 2% to only 0.6%
in the four quarters to 2015 Q3 — means that unit labour cost
growth has picked up in recent quarters. Inflation remains
weak, however, reflecting the past dollar appreciation and falls
in energy prices. Personal consumption expenditure inflation
stood at 0.4% in December (Table 1.B), well below the
FOMC’s price stability objective of 2%.
The outlook for US GDP growth is a little weaker than in
November. Falls in asset prices and the associated tightening
in financial conditions are projected to weigh on near-term
growth. Overall, however, growth is projected to continue at
a moderate pace, supported by strong real income growth.
(1) For further discussion, see Forbes, K (2016), ‘A tale of two labour markets: the UK
and US’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/
speech875.pdf.
The preliminary estimate of output growth in Q4 was 0.5%, in
line with the projection made three months ago (Chart 2.1).
But estimates of GDP in 2014–15 have been revised down
since November, such that the level of GDP in 2015 Q3 is
0.3% lower. And, while the Q4 estimate had previously been
expected to be revised up to 0.6% in the mature estimate, it is
now expected to be unrevised. On the latest backcast —
which anticipates future revisions — four-quarter GDP growth
has, since 2013, slowed from a little above to a little below its
historical average rate. Although a slowing had been
anticipated, GDP growth has been slightly softer than
expected.
This section examines the slowing in growth since 2013
through the lenses of the output and expenditure data. In the
output estimates of GDP, the slowing has been concentrated
in manufacturing and business-focused services (Section 2.1),
both relatively dependent on exports. This suggests that some
of the slowdown in UK GDP growth reflects the direct effects
of a weaker global economy (Section 2.3), but this is unlikely
to be the only factor. Construction output growth also slowed
in 2015, matched on the expenditure side by a slowing in
housing investment growth (Section 2.2). The slowing in the
output measure of GDP growth, however, is not fully matched
by a slowing in final expenditure growth (Chart 2.2).
Growth is projected to be broadly stable in the near term: real
income growth and some further decline in private saving are
projected to be sufficient to keep private final domestic
demand growth resilient in the face of external headwinds and
continued fiscal consolidation. But the downward revisions to
recent growth, together with the stability of survey indicators,
point to a slightly weaker near-term outlook than in
November. GDP growth in 2016 Q1 is projected to be 0.5% in
both the preliminary and the mature estimates (Chart 2.1).
10 Inflation Report February 2016
Table 2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in November Developments since November
Cost of credit Broadly as expected
• Credit spreads to widen slightly in
2015 Q4, and then fall back.
• Credit spreads widened slightly in Q4.
Consumer spending Broadly as expected
• Quarterly consumption growth of
around ¾%.
• Saving ratio of around 3¾% by
2016 Q2.
• Quarterly consumption growth of 0.8%
in Q3.
• Saving ratio of 4.4% in Q3.
Housing market Broadly as expected
• A rise in mortgage approvals for house
purchase to around 74,000 a month,
on average, in 2016 Q1.
• Rates of increase in the main indices of
national house prices to average
around ½% per month.
• Quarterly housing investment growth
to average around 1%.
• Mortgage approvals for house purchase
averaged 70,000 in Q4.
• Average of Halifax and Nationwide price
indices grew by 0.7% per month in Q4 on
average.
• Quarterly housing investment fell by 1½%
in Q3, but estimates can be volatile.
Investment Stronger than expected
• Quarterly business investment growth
to average above 1½%.
• Quarterly business investment growth was
2.2% in Q3.
In 2015, four-quarter GDP growth slowed from a little above to a little below its historical average
rate. Although a slowing was anticipated, growth has been slightly softer than expected. In the
near term, private domestic demand growth is projected to remain resilient in the face of subdued
global growth and continued fiscal consolidation, supported by the past easing in credit conditions
and continued solid real income growth.
2 Demand and output
 Section 2 Demand and output 11
2.1 Output
Quarterly GDP growth averaged 0.5% in 2015, compared with
0.7% over the previous two years. Manufacturing is one
sector where output growth has slowed (Chart 2.3).
According to intelligence from the Bank’s Agents, this may be
related to the past appreciation of sterling, the slowdown in
global growth (Section 1) and weak investment demand from
the extraction sector (Section 2.2). This would also be
consistent with evidence from some business surveys — such
as the quarterly BCC survey — which suggest that export
orders have weakened by more than domestic orders.
Much of the slowdown in output growth can be attributed to a
slowing in growth in business-focused service subsectors
(Chart 2.3). Business-focused services tend to export a
greater proportion of their output, which may suggest that
weak external demand is, in part, responsible for this slowing
in growth. Output growth in consumer-focused subsectors, in
contrast, has remained resilient.
One domestic-facing sector that has contributed to the
slowing in growth since 2013–14 is construction. In part this is
likely to reflect the past slowdown in housing market activity
(Section 2.2).
2.2 Domestic demand
Household spending
Supported by strong income growth, consumer spending
growth has been robust. In 2015 Q3, quarterly consumption
growth remained at 0.8% (Table 2.B), and growth in real
post-tax labour income was 3.7% in the year to 2015 Q3
(Chart 2.4), above its pre-crisis average rate of 3.2%. Over
the past two years, real incomes have been boosted by a
pickup in wage and employment growth and by falling energy
and food prices (Section 4).
In the near term, growth in households’ total income is likely
to be affected by a degree of volatility in investment income.
In anticipation of the change in tax treatment in April 2016,
some dividend payments from companies to households are
likely to be brought forward. Although that has few
implications for the level of income in the medium term, it is
likely to support total income growth ahead of the change and
weigh on it in the following year.
Looking through this volatility, real income growth is
projected to remain firm, although slightly weaker than
projected three months ago. Since November, the support
from lower oil prices has continued: sterling spot oil prices
have fallen by a further 34%, which, by itself, would add
around ¼% to real incomes. Acting against that, however, the
outlook for nominal wage growth has weakened (Section 3),
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2012 13 14 15 16
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
Projection of preliminary GDP
 at the time of the November Report(c)
GDP
Estimate implied by the mode of the latest backcast(b)
Projection(c)
+
–
Chart 2.1 GDP growth was 0.5% in Q4
Bank staff’s projections for near-term output growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures. GDP is at market prices.
(b) The latest backcast, shown to the left of the vertical line, is a judgement about the path for
GDP in the mature estimate of the data. The observation for 2016 Q1, to the right of the
vertical line, is consistent with the MPC’s central projection.
(c) The magenta diamond shows Bank staff’s central projection for the preliminary estimate of
GDP growth for 2015 Q4 at the time of the November Report. The green diamond shows the
current staff projection for the preliminary estimate of GDP growth for 2016 Q1. The bands on
either side of the diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean
squared error of past Bank staff forecasts for quarterly GDP growth made since 2004.
Consumption
Business investment
Housing investment
Government Net trade
Other(b)
GDP growth (per cent)
+
–
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2013–14 2015(c)
Percentage points
Chart 2.2 Final expenditure does not fully explain the
slowing in growth
Contributions to average quarterly GDP growth by expenditure
component(a)
(a) Chained-volume measures.
(b) Calculated as a residual. Includes inventories, the alignment adjustment and the statistical
discrepancy.
(c) As expenditure estimates for Q4 are not yet available, growth rates for 2015 are an average
of growth rates in the first three quarters of 2015.
12 Inflation Report February 2016
such that real income growth over the next year is projected
to be slower than anticipated in November.
In addition to real income growth, the outlook for
consumption growth will depend on changes in household
saving. In Q3, saving out of available income — excluding
income that goes directly to pension schemes, which may be
less relevant for current spending decisions — remained close
to its average rate in the decade prior to the crisis (Chart 2.5).
One factor that is likely to influence household saving
decisions is confidence about the economic outlook and future
income prospects. According to the GfK/EC survey,
confidence has improved significantly over the past few years
and the balances of all the headline indices are above their
historical averages. Debt levels may also have some bearing
on household saving. Relative to income, household debt has
fallen over the past few years to below its level immediately
prior to the crisis. But, while debt affordability has improved,
in the September 2015 NMG Consulting survey the proportion
of households reporting putting off spending due to credit
concerns remained elevated.(1)
Conditions in credit and financial markets are also important
determinants of households’ net saving and, as explained in
the box on pages 14–15, were the subject of a recent joint
meeting between the MPC and the Financial Policy
Committee. Overall, household credit conditions have
improved significantly over the past few years, and consumer
credit growth in particular — which includes personal loans,
overdrafts and credit cards — has recently been robust.
Indicative estimates suggest that a significant part of these
flows during 2014 and 2015 were for car finance, a large part
of which would be closer in nature to secured rather than
unsecured debt.(2)
In the near term, quarterly consumption growth is projected
to be resilient, but to slow a little to around 0.6% in 2016 Q1,
in part reflecting slower real income growth.
The housing market
Although consumption growth has remained fairly steady,
housing investment growth is estimated to have slowed
sharply over the past few quarters following a sharp increase
in 2013–14 (Chart 2.6), contributing to the slowdown in GDP
growth. Housing investment comprises three distinct parts:
around one fifth is spending on services associated with
property transactions, while around a third is spending on
newly built dwellings and the remainder is spending on
improvements to existing dwellings. The growth rates of all
three have slowed. This broad-based slowing is likely, in part,
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2013–14 2015
Other services(b) (19%)
Other production (5%)
Manufacturing (10%)
Construction (6%)
Business-focused services (33%)
Consumer-focused services (27%)
Output gross value added (GVA)
 growth (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 2.3 Construction, manufacturing and service
sector output growth have slowed
Contributions to average quarterly GVA growth by output
sector(a)
(a) Chained-volume measures at basic prices. Contributions may not sum to the total due to
rounding. Service industries are defined as ‘consumer-focused’ if the share of their output
that is directly consumed exceeds the share of output that is sold to other businesses to be
used as intermediate inputs, while the reverse is true for ‘business-focused’ service sectors.
Calculated using the United Kingdom Input-Output Analytical Tables 2010. Figures in
parentheses are weights in nominal GDP in 2012.
(b) Other services includes: public administration and defence; health services and education.
Table 2.B Private sector domestic demand growth was resilient
in Q3
Expenditure components of demand(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
 Averages
 1998– 2008– 2010– 2013– 2015
 2007 09 12 14 Q1 Q2 Q3
Household consumption(b) 0.9 -0.6 0.2 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.8
Private sector investment 0.7 -4.2 1.2 1.6 0.7 2.1 1.0
of which, business investment(c) 0.5 -2.8 1.5 1.2 2.6 0.9 2.2
of which, private sector
housing investment 0.8 -7.0 0.8 3.0 -3.3 4.7 -1.5
Private sector final domestic
demand 0.8 -1.3 0.4 0.9 0.7 1.1 0.8
Government consumption
and investment(c) 0.8 0.9 -0.1 0.4 0.7 0.8 0.4
Final domestic demand 0.8 -0.8 0.3 0.8 0.7 1.0 0.7
Change in inventories(d)(e) 0.0 0.2 0.1 -0.1 0.1 -1.0 0.0
Alignment adjustment(e) 0.0 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 -0.8 0.5
Domestic demand(f) 0.8 -0.7 0.4 0.7 1.3 -1.0 1.4
‘Economic’ exports(g) 1.1 -1.0 0.8 1.0 0.0 2.8 -0.3
‘Economic’ imports(g) 1.4 -1.1 0.8 1.0 3.0 -2.3 2.8
Net trade(e)(g) -0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 -1.0 1.6 -1.0
Real GDP at market prices 0.7 -0.7 0.4 0.7 0.4 0.5 0.4
Memo: nominal GDP at
market prices 1.3 -0.1 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.8 0.7
(a) Chained-volume measures unless otherwise stated.
(b) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Investment data take account of the transfer of nuclear reactors from the public corporation sector to
central government in 2005 Q2.
(d) Excludes the alignment adjustment.
(e) Percentage point contributions to quarterly growth of real GDP.
(f) Includes acquisitions less disposals of valuables.
(g) Excluding the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC) fraud. Official MTIC-adjusted data are not
available for exports, so the headline exports data have been adjusted by an amount equal to the ONS
import adjustment.
(1) For more detail on the evolution of household debt see the box on page 15 of the
November 2015 Inflation Report; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/inflationreport/2015/nov.pdf.
(2) For more detail on the components of consumer credit see the box on pages 9–11 of
the 2015 Q3 Credit Conditions Review; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/creditconditionsreview/2015/ccrq315.pdf. 
 Section 2 Demand and output 13
to reflect the slowdown in housing market activity in 2014
(Chart 2.7), but supply factors may also increasingly have
constrained the building of new, and improvements to
existing, dwellings over this period.
The outlook for housing investment — and transaction-related
expenditure in particular — will depend on developments in
housing market activity. The continued easing in credit
conditions over the past few years is likely to have supported
activity in the housing market: mortgage interest rates fell
significantly during that period and, according to the latest
Credit Conditions Survey, credit availability continued to
improve in 2015 Q4. The number of mortgage approvals for
house purchase has picked up slightly over the past three
months, although it remains substantially below its
1994–2007 average level (Chart 2.7). Overall housing
transactions — including those financed purely with cash —
increased by slightly more than mortgage approvals in Q4.
As mortgage approvals have risen, so has the volume of
mortgage lending. Much of this growth can be attributed to
the buy-to-let sector. In the year to 2015 Q3, the stock of
buy-to-let lending rose by 10%, compared to just 0.4% for
lending to owner-occupiers.(1) Buy-to-let transactions are also
likely to have contributed to the increase in cash purchases.
The outlook for the buy-to-let sector, and for overall housing
market activity, will depend in part on the impact of planned
tax changes. From April 2016, stamp duty land tax on
additional properties — including buy-to-let — will be
increased by 3 percentage points and, from April 2017, the
scope of mortgage interest tax relief will be reduced. Both
changes are likely to lower housing demand from buy-to-let
investors, although over time some of this may be offset
by increased demand from existing and potential
owner-occupiers. The pre-announcement of the change in
stamp duty is also likely to cause some housing transactions
to be brought forward — boosting housing transactions in
2016 Q1, but reducing them commensurately later in the year
— although it will affect fewer purchasers than previous
pre-announced broader changes in stamp duty (Chart 2.7).
Looking through any near-term volatility resulting from the
changes to stamp duty, housing demand is projected to pick
up gradually, supported by historically low borrowing rates.
There is, however, a risk that the changes in stamp duty and
mortgage interest tax relief will weigh more on housing
demand than assumed.
The rate at which activity picks up will also depend on growth
in new and secondary market housing supply, which has been
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2011 12 13 14 15
Nominal labour income per head(a)
Prices(b)
Employment
Benefits and transfers
 per head(c)
Income tax per head
Real post-tax labour
 income growth
 (per cent)(d)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 2.4 Falling oil prices and a strengthening labour
market have supported real income growth
Contributions to four-quarter growth in real post-tax labour
income
(a) Wages and salaries plus mixed income.
(b) Measured using the consumption deflator (including non-profit institutions serving
households).
(c) Net transfers are general government benefits less employees’ National Insurance
contributions.
(d) Nominal post-tax labour income divided by the consumption deflator (including non-profit
institutions serving households).
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Per cent
1997–2007 average
+
–
Chart 2.5 Household saving has been broadly stable
recently
Household saving out of available income(a)
(a) Percentage of household post-tax income excluding flows into employment-related pension
schemes.
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Percentage change on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 2.6 Housing investment growth has slowed
sharply
Housing investment(a)
(a) Chained-volume measure.
(1) For more on developments in the buy-to-let sector, see the December 2015 Financial
Stability Report; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
fsr/2015/dec.pdf.
14 Inflation Report February 2016
Conditions in credit and financial markets
On 6 January, members of the Financial Policy Committee
(FPC) and the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) met to
discuss, and were presented with material on, conditions in
credit and financial markets. This box summarises that
material.
Why do conditions in credit and financial markets
matter?
Conditions in credit and financial markets matter for the FPC
because they affect the degree of risk faced by the financial
system. They matter for the MPC because they may affect
GDP growth and consumer price inflation; for example,
fluctuations in the prices of financial assets change the value
of wealth and collateral against which people can borrow,
thereby influencing spending by households and businesses.
Past experience suggests that the dynamics of credit and
financial market conditions can differ significantly from those
of the real economy. In addition, imbalances and risks in
credit and financial markets can grow without necessarily
being immediately apparent in other macroeconomic
indicators such as inflation or GDP growth. It is important for
policymakers — whether their objective is monetary or
financial stability — to consider both macroeconomic and
financial indicators.
Conditions in credit and financial markets have many
dimensions, for example: the price at, and terms on, which
credit is granted; the volume of credit; the degree of leverage;
and the prices at which financial assets are trading relative to
some sense of their equilibrium values. The Committees were
shown material on a range of indicators, as well as alternative
ways of assessing their sustainability, as these can be sensitive
to the assumptions used.
In particular, an assessment of the equilibrium levels of asset
prices is sensitive to assumptions about future income streams
and the long-term interest rates by which they are discounted.
Both are highly uncertain. Long-term real interest rates in the
United Kingdom have declined significantly over the past
35 years (Chart A), and there is evidence that some of that
decline has been driven by global secular trends such as
shifting demographics and saving patterns.(1)
Some factors that could have driven part of the decline in
long-term interest rates — such as lower expected future
income growth — would not be expected to have pushed up
asset prices or their equilibrium values. Other factors that
may have weighed on long-term interest rates, however, such
as increased saving as a consequence of global demographic
trends, may have put upward pressure on asset prices. The
extent to which that will also be reflected in higher
equilibrium values will depend on how persistent these factors
are expected to be and how quickly long-term interest rates
are likely to rise as those factors wane.
Indicators of conditions in credit and financial markets
One key measure of conditions in credit and financial markets
is the volume or growth rate of overall outstanding credit. The
overall credit to GDP ratio has fallen since the onset of the
crisis, from around 175% to around 140%. Private sector
credit growth has picked up recently and is now broadly in line
with nominal GDP growth, having been subdued since the
onset of the crisis (Chart B).
These measures of aggregate credit conditions, however,
might not capture risks in particular financial or credit
markets. Further, it is not possible to assess, at an aggregate
level, those aspects of financial fragility that depend on the
nature and distribution of assets and liabilities. So the
Committees were also shown material on indicators relating
to individual markets such as those for corporate finance,
consumer credit, commercial property — including prime
London real estate — and residential property — including the
buy-to-let sector. In addition to the stock and flow of credit,
indicators of underwriting standards, the distribution of debt,
write-off rates, interest rate spreads and affordability are
important for judging conditions in credit markets.
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1990 95 2000 05 10 15
Per cent
Chart A The UK long-term real interest rate has
declined significantly over the past few decades
UK long-term real interest rate(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Ten-year spot index-linked gilt rate. Monthly averages. The last data point is for
January 2016 and uses data to 27 January 2016.
(1) For more detail on the potential drivers of long-term interest rates see Rachel, L and
Smith, T (2015), ‘Secular drivers of the global real interest rate’, Bank of England Staff
Working Paper No. 571, www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/
workingpapers/2015/swp571.pdf; and Vlieghe, G (2016), ‘Debt, demographics and
the distribution of income: new challenges for monetary policy’,
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech872.pdf.
 Section 2 Demand and output 15
Growth in household and corporate lending (Chart C) both
remain somewhat below their pre-crisis average rates, and the
proportion of income used for debt repayments is well below
historical averages for both households and companies. Credit
growth has been somewhat stronger in certain markets,
however, such as for consumer credit and buy-to-let mortgage
lending.
The terms and conditions on which credit is granted, including
interest rates and associated underwriting standards, may
affect the interpretation of credit growth and are often
timelier indicators of credit conditions. Interest rate spreads
— over and above the rate on safe assets such as government
bonds — on bank lending to households and companies have
narrowed substantially over recent years, although this partly
reflected an unwind of increases during the financial crisis.
Spreads on investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds
have widened in recent months (Section 1), which might
indicate some tightening in financial conditions.
Overall, the improvement in the price and availability of credit
suggested that the UK financial system was normalising
following the post-crisis period. Within that, some sectors
were experiencing relatively robust lending activity, while
others remained more subdued. Both Committees intend to
monitor developments closely.
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
1970 75 80 85 90 95 2000 05 10 15
Percentage points
+
–
Chart B Private sector credit growth is now in line with
GDP growth
Private sector credit growth relative to GDP growth(a)
(a) Four-quarter credit growth minus four-quarter GDP growth. Credit growth measured as M4
and M4 lending (excluding the effects of securitisations) prior to 1998 Q4, and equivalent
measures excluding the deposits of, and borrowing by, intermediate other financial
corporations thereafter. GDP is at current market prices.
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Consumer credit(b)
Secured lending to individuals(a)
Lending to UK private non-financial corporations(c)
+
–
Chart C Consumer credit growth has picked up by more
than business or secured household lending
Household and corporate lending
(a) Sterling net lending by UK monetary financial institutions (MFIs) and other lenders.
(b) Sterling net lending by UK MFIs and other lenders. Consumer credit consists of credit card
lending and other unsecured lending (other loans and advances) and excludes student loans.
(c) Sterling net lending by UK MFIs.
subdued. Over the past few years a number of factors have
particularly constrained the supply of newly built dwellings,
notably the supplies of skilled labour and materials. According
to the latest RICS construction market survey, the shortage of
building materials appears to have eased somewhat, which
should support housebuilding, although labour and skills
shortages remain a constraint on activity.
A consequence of the pickup in housing demand, together
with limited supply of both new homes and homes for sale on
the secondary market, has been robust house price inflation
(Chart 2.8). The average of the Halifax and Nationwide
measures of house prices increased by 7% in the four quarters
to 2015 Q4. This rate of increase is projected to soften only
slightly to around 6% in the near term: although indicators of
house price inflation have stabilised in recent quarters, they
remain elevated.
Overall, the slight easing in supply constraints, together with
upward revisions to estimates of dwellings investment growth
Mortgage approvals
 for house purchase
Previous pre-announced
 changes in stamp duty
Housing transactions(a)
1994–2007
 average
 mortgage
 approvals for
 house purchase
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2006 09 12 15
Thousands per month
Chart 2.7 Mortgage approvals and housing transactions
increased slightly in Q4
Mortgage approvals and housing transactions
Sources: Bank of England, HM Revenue and Customs and Bank calculations.
(a) Number of residential property transactions for values of £40,000 or above.
16 Inflation Report February 2016
in the past, suggest a stronger near-term outlook for housing
investment growth than projected three months ago.
Consistent with this, some indicators of residential
construction and housing market activity have been
strengthening over the past twelve months.
Business investment
Recent business investment growth has been significantly
faster than its pre-crisis average rate and this continued in
2015 Q3 (Table 2.B), although early estimates are often
subject to large revisions. Continued demand growth over the
past few years, and a desire to increase capacity to fulfil it, has
been one driver of this strength, according to evidence from
business surveys and intelligence from the Bank’s Agents.
External finance is one source of funding for investment. Net
external finance raised by private non-financial corporations
(PNFCs) averaged around £7 billion per quarter in 2015
(Table 2.C), the highest level since 2008.(1) While corporate
credit conditions were little changed on the quarter, they have
improved significantly over the past few years, as discussed in
the latest Credit Conditions Review. This should support
investment growth, although the outlook for credit conditions
will be sensitive to developments in financial markets. The
widening in corporate bond spreads since November will have
raised the cost of capital for some companies (Section 1), and,
although this will have been partly offset by recent falls in
reference rates, there is a risk that further financial market
volatility leads to higher financing costs.
Internal funds are also an important source of financing for
investment. In aggregate, companies appear to be holding
higher levels of cash than prior to the crisis and corporate
deposit growth has been strong since the end of 2012. This
growth in deposits appears to have been strongest for small
and medium-sized enterprises, which account for around a
third of total business investment. Although, intelligence from
the Bank’s Agents suggests that while some businesses are
holding higher cash balances in anticipation of opportunities
for expansion, others are holding them for precautionary
reasons.
One factor that has been weighing on overall business
investment growth is investment by the oil extraction industry
(Chart 2.9), which fell by around 20% between 2014 Q2 and
2015 Q3. While some of this slowing reflected an expected
reduction in extraction investment from unusually high levels
in early 2014, it was also in part a response to the fall in oil
prices since mid-2014. The expected persistence of low oil
prices has resulted in further cuts in planned investment,
according to intelligence from the Bank’s Agents and industry
House prices(b)
Range of house price
 inflation indicators(a)
+
–
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Three-month on three-month annualised percentage change
Chart 2.8 House price inflation remains robust
House prices and indicators of house price inflation
Sources: Bank of England, Halifax, Nationwide, Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS)
and Bank calculations.
(a) Swathe includes RICS balances for prices over the past three months, price expectations over
the next three months (lagged three months), the new buyer enquiries balance less the
instructions to sell balance (lagged six months) and the sales to stock ratio (lagged one
month), scaled to match the mean and variance of three-month on three-month annualised
growth in the average of the Halifax and Nationwide measures of house prices since 2000.
(b) House prices are an average of the Halifax and Nationwide measures.
(1) For more detail on external sources of finance for UK businesses in 2015, see the box
on pages 12–14 of the 2015 Q4 Credit Conditions Review; www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/creditconditionsreview/2016/ccrq415.pdf.
Table 2.C Net external finance raised by companies increased in
2015
Net finance raised by PNFCs(a)
£ billions, quarterly averages
 2003–08 2009–12 2013 2014 2015
Loans 11.7 -6.2 -2.1 -0.9 1.3
Bonds(b)(c) 2.9 3.3 2.2 3.6 3.2
Equities(b) -2.1 1.3 -1.2 1.6 1.1
Commercial paper(b) 0.0 -0.4 0.0 -0.6 1.5
Total(d) 12.3 -2.1 -1.1 3.6 7.1
Memo: PNFC loan growth(e) 2.8 -0.7 -0.1 -0.4 0.3
(a) Includes sterling and foreign currency funds from capital markets and UK monetary financial institutions.
(b) Non seasonally adjusted.
(c) Includes stand-alone and programme bonds.
(d) As component series are not all seasonally adjusted, the total may not equal the sum of its components.
(e) Sterling net lending excluding the effects of securitisation. Percentage change on a quarter earlier.
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
2007 09 11 13 15
Services (58%)
Manufacturing (15%)
Mining and quarrying, oil and gas extraction (6%)
Electricity, gas and water (12%)
Other (10%)(c)
Total (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 2.9 Extraction investment has weighed on overall
business investment growth
Contributions to four-quarter business investment growth(a)(b)
(a) Chained-volume measures. Contributions prior to 2012 are indicative estimates.
(b) Figures in parentheses are shares in total nominal business investment in 2012.
(c) Total business investment, less contributions from the mining and quarrying, oil and gas
extraction, utilities, manufacturing and service sectors.
 Section 2 Demand and output 17
sources. Extraction investment is therefore projected to fall
significantly further, reducing the level of overall business
investment by around 5% (Section 5). Extraction investment,
however, tends to be import-intensive, so weaker import
volumes will offset some of the effect on GDP of weaker
investment. Overall, the level of GDP is projected to be
around ¼% lower as a result.
Reflecting in part the weaker outlook for extraction
investment, quarterly business investment growth is projected
to slow slightly to around 1% in 2016 H1, a little weaker than
projected three months ago. This is, however, still somewhat
stronger than its pre-crisis average rate of 0.5%, consistent
with surveys of investment intentions, which remain around or
above their historical averages.
Government spending
The MPC’s forecasts are conditioned on continued fiscal
consolidation. Announcements in the 2016 Autumn
Statement included changes to expenditure and taxation plans
that, overall, increase public sector net borrowing slightly in
2016. This is projected to provide a small boost to GDP
growth relative to previous projections, although the overall
fiscal consolidation is still expected to weigh on GDP growth
over the forecast period. The precise impact of all the changes
in government borrowing will depend on a number of factors,
including: the distribution of changes to incomes as a result of
the consolidation; the degree to which individuals and
companies adjust their spending in response; and whether
changes are anticipated and therefore already reflected in
spending decisions.
2.3 UK net trade
While the output data suggest that weaker external demand
may have contributed to the slowing in GDP growth since
2013 (Section 2.1), net trade was only a small drag on growth
over 2015 (Table 2.B). In particular, despite weak world
demand growth and the past appreciation in sterling, exports
are estimated to have increased by 6% in the four quarters to
Q3. Since the November Report, sterling has depreciated by
around 3½%, which might be expected to boost demand for
UK exports to some extent. But sterling remains around 13%
above its trough in early 2013 and any boost from the recent
depreciation is likely to be offset by the weaker outlook for
world trade (Section 1). Export growth is expected to
moderate slightly in the near term, consistent with the recent
falls in survey indicators of goods exports (Chart 2.10).
UK import volumes also increased by 6% in the four quarters
to Q3. This strength can partly be explained by the strength
of expenditure, although the past appreciation in sterling,
which has reduced import prices relative to prices of domestic
alternatives (Chart 2.11), is also likely to have played a role.
Import penetration — the proportion of demand satisfied
ONS goods exports(b)
Range of survey indicators(a)
+
–
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Chart 2.10 Export growth appears stronger than
suggested by survey indicators
Exports of goods and survey indicators
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, Markit/CIPS, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Includes measures of manufacturing export orders from BCC, CBI and Markit/CIPS, together
with scores from the Bank’s Agents for manufacturing output for export, scaled to match the
mean and variance of four-quarter goods export growth since 2000. BCC data are non
seasonally adjusted.
(b) Chained-volume measure. Data are to 2015 Q3. Goods export data exclude the estimated
impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC) fraud, calculated as nominal MTIC
adjustment, divided by the goods import deflator.
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110 80
90
100
110
120
130
140
1998 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Index: 1998 = 100
Relative import prices(b)
 (left-hand scale,
 which has been inverted)
Imports relative to import-weighted
 expenditure(a) (right-hand scale)
Index: 1998 = 100
Chart 2.11 Import penetration has picked up
Relative import prices and imports relative to import-weighted
demand
(a) UK imports as a proportion of import-weighted total expenditure, chained-volume measures.
Import-weighted total expenditure is calculated by weighting together household
consumption (including non-profit institutions serving households), whole-economy
investment (excluding valuables), government spending, inventories (excluding the alignment
adjustment) and exports by their respective import intensities, estimated using the
United Kingdom Input-Output Analytical Tables 2010. Import and export data have been
adjusted to exclude the estimated impact of MTIC fraud.
(b) Import price deflator divided by the market price GDP deflator.
18 Inflation Report February 2016
using imported goods and services — has begun to increase,
which suggests that the appreciation has led to some
substitution from domestically produced goods to imported
alternatives. The most recent depreciation, however, may
weigh a little on import growth, as will lower extraction
investment (Section 2.2).
After the most recent revisions to the trade data, the official
estimate of the UK trade balance — exports less imports in
nominal terms — widened by less than expected between Q2
and Q3, to a deficit equivalent to 1.9% of GDP (Chart 2.12).
Further, the deficit on primary income — net payments on
foreign direct and portfolio investment — narrowed in Q3:
this was largely driven by a fall in the profits and dividends of
UK companies rather than an increase in profitability of UK
residents’ overseas assets. As a consequence, the overall
current account was broadly unchanged at 3.7% of GDP,
against an expectation that it would widen.
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2006 09 12 15
Secondary income
Primary income
Trade balance
Current account balance
Percentages of nominal GDP
+
–
Chart 2.12 The current account deficit was broadly
unchanged in Q3
UK current account
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 19
Table 3.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in November Developments since November
Unemployment Lower than expected
• Headline LFS unemployment rate to fall
slightly to 5.3% by mid-2016.
• The unemployment rate fell to 5.1% in
the three months to November.
Participation Broadly in line with expectations
• Participation rate to pick up slightly by
mid-2016 to a little under 63½%.
• Participation rate rose modestly to 63.5%
in the three months to November.
Average hours Lower than expected
• Average hours worked to increase by
around ½% by mid-2016.
• Average hours rose by less than expected
in the three months to November.
Productivity In line with expectations
• Hourly labour productivity growth to
average a little under ¼% a quarter.
• Hourly labour productivity growth is
estimated to have been 1% in the
four quarters to Q4.
Earnings growth Weaker than expected
• Four-quarter AWE growth to
temporarily dip to 2½% in Q4 due to
volatility in bonuses a year earlier,
before picking up to 3¼% by mid-2016.
• Four-quarter AWE growth was 2% in the
three months to November.
The outlook for output growth depends on demand (Section 2)
and the supply capacity of the economy. Potential supply
cannot be directly observed and therefore the MPC monitors a
range of indicators to ascertain its evolution. Employment
growth has remained strong and the unemployment rate has
continued to decline to around its pre-crisis level (Section 3.1).
Four-quarter hourly labour productivity growth has continued
at a stronger pace than in recent years, although it slowed in Q4
(Section 3.2). Having picked up sharply in 2014 (Chart 3.1),
wage growth has slowed, and by more than expected
(Table 3.A).
While the weakness in wage growth could indicate that there is
still significant slack in the labour market (Section 3.3), there
are other factors that appear to be weighing temporarily on
wages (Section 3.4). The MPC has reassessed its judgements
about the outlook for potential output in this Report and judges
that, in the near term, supply growth is likely to be softer than
previously anticipated. This reflects a weaker outlook for
growth in labour supply, in particular the average number of
hours worked, which is only partly offset by a stronger
contribution from productivity growth. There is, however,
considerable uncertainty around the outlook for supply and the
MPC will continue to reassess its judgements periodically.
3.1 Labour market developments
Population and participation in the labour market
A key component of potential supply in the economy is labour.
Growth in labour supply derives mainly from population
growth, which over the past few years has been supported by
an increase in net inward migration. In the year to June 2015,
net inward migration rose to 336,000, equivalent to around
0.5% of the population. As discussed in the box on pages 30–31
of the May 2015 Report, while net migration contributes to
labour supply, it also raises domestic demand. Under the ONS
projections, population growth is assumed to slow over the
next three years, which will weigh on labour supply growth.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2013 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Total pay
Regular pay(a) +
_
(a) Whole-economy total pay excluding bonuses and arrears of pay.
Chart 3.1 Wage growth has slowed
Average weekly earnings: total and regular pay
3 Supply and the labour market
Employment has grown at a strong pace and the unemployment rate has declined further over the
past year, to 5.1% in the three months to November. Despite this, nominal wage growth has
softened in recent months. There appear to be a number of factors temporarily weighing on wage
growth, including continuing shifts in the composition of employment and possibly low headline
inflation. Productivity growth also slowed in Q4, but four-quarter growth remains stronger than in
recent years. 
20 Inflation Report February 2016
62.4
62.6
62.8
63.0
63.2
63.4
63.6
63.8 Per cent
2001 04 07 10 13 0.0
(a) Percentages of 16+ population. The diamond shows Bank staff’s central projection for
2015 Q4, based on ONS data to November 2015.
Chart 3.2 The participation rate has been broadly stable
in recent years
Labour force participation rate(a)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Change in demography
Change in age-specific participation rates
Total change
Percentage points
+
_
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Percentage of 16+ population. Decomposition calculated using published ONS age
groupings. The small cross-product term, reflecting the interaction between changing
demographics and age-specific participation rates, has been allocated to the contribution of
the change in age-specific participation.
Chart 3.3 The drag from demographics on the
participation rate is being offset by increased
participation by older people
Contributions to the change in the participation rate since
2008 Q3(a)
The underlying supply of labour depends also on the
proportion of the population actively participating in the
labour market. After recovering from a cyclical decline during
the crisis, the participation rate has been relatively stable over
the past three years at around its rate immediately prior to the
crisis (Chart 3.2). Slower natural population growth and
higher net inward migration relative to the ONS’s previous
population projections in 2013 mean that, when updated
population estimates are incorporated into the Labour Force
Survey (LFS) later this year, the 16+ participation rate over the
past year is likely to be revised up by around 0.1 percentage
points.
The recent stability in the participation rate has masked two
significant and largely offsetting influences. As the average
age of the population has risen over the past decade, the
declining share of people in age groups with the highest
participation rates, particularly 35–49 year olds, has dragged
on the overall rate (Chart 3.3). These demographic trends
have, however, been broadly offset by changes in participation
rates within different age groups. In particular, participation
rates of older women have increased.(1)
Bank staff estimate that the participation rate is close to its
equilibrium level. As the broadly offsetting trends of an ageing
population and increased labour participation by older people
continue, the participation rate and its equilibrium level are
projected to remain largely stable. There is, however,
uncertainty around this profile and risks in both directions.
On the one hand, the desire to participate may have been
boosted by past falls in real income. As real incomes continue
to recover, the tendency to participate could fall posing a
downside risk to the participation rate. On the other hand,
some policy changes, such as the planned increase in
government-funded childcare from 2017, could increase the
participation rate.
Employment and average hours
Overall labour supply, and wage growth, will also depend on
the demand for labour and the number of hours people want
to work. Employment has grown very strongly over the past
two years. Having flattened in mid-2015, it grew by 267,000
in the three months to November, close to four times its
pre-crisis average rate (Table 3.B). Correspondingly, the
unemployment rate fell to 5.1% in the three months to
November, and is expected to have averaged 5.0% in Q4
(Chart 3.4).
Average hours worked rose during the post-crisis recovery, but
have declined by around ½% since late 2014. As explained in
the box on pages 22–23, the fall in average hours is judged to
(1) For a more in-depth discussion of the participation rate and labour supply, see
Berry, S, Corder, M, Duffy, C, Hackworth, C and Speigner, B (2015), ‘Trends in UK
labour supply’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 55, No. 4, pages 344–56;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2015/q403.pdf. 
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 21
reflect a decline in the number of hours people want to work,
rather than greater slack in the labour market. Average hours
are now judged to be close to their equilibrium level, which is
lower than previously estimated, and are projected to decline
gradually.
While some indicators of labour demand growth have
softened, most remain relatively strong (Table 3.B). The
consequences of the continued strong demand for labour in
the face of falling average hours will depend on how much
further the unemployment rate can fall before it generates
significant cost pressures — in other words, how close the
unemployment rate is to its equilibrium level.
Bank staff estimate that the unemployment rate is currently
around its long-run equilibrium level, though there is
considerable uncertainty around this judgement. On the one
hand, the increased share of older people in the labour force
and increases in average educational attainment could suggest
a lower equilibrium unemployment rate, as both of these
characteristics have been associated with higher employment
rates in the past. And some of the weakness in wage growth
(Section 3.4) may also indicate that the equilibrium rate is
lower. On the other hand, the proportion of people out of
work for more than a year remains above its pre-crisis average
rate (Chart 3.5). This could indicate that the people in
long-term unemployment have become less well matched to
the available jobs, reducing the scope for the unemployment
rate to remain at 5% without generating significant cost
pressures.(1)
In the near term, the unemployment rate is projected to
remain broadly flat (Chart 3.4) as employment growth slows
towards labour force growth.
3.2 Productivity and capacity utilisation
The outlook for supply and wage growth will depend
fundamentally on the productivity of the workforce.
Four-quarter growth in hourly labour productivity — defined
as output per hour worked — picked up sharply in 2015 Q2 to
1.4% and, while it is expected to have slowed to 1% in Q4, it
remains stronger than in recent years (Chart 3.6).
To understand the drivers of hourly labour productivity
growth, it is helpful to decompose it into the contribution
from growth in the capital stock and growth in total factor
productivity, which is measured as the increase in output over
and above the increase in inputs of capital and labour. While
the capital stock is estimated to have risen in recent quarters,
total factor productivity appears to have accounted for most
of the acceleration in labour productivity growth (Chart 3.7).
The extent to which this growth rate is sustained will depend
(1) See Berry et al (2015) page 350, op. cit., for a discussion of labour market matching.
Table 3.B Labour demand growth remains strong
Employment growth, vacancies and survey indicators of employment
intentions
 Quarterly averages
 2000– 2010– 2013 2014 2015 2015 2015 2015
 07(a) 12 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Employment growth(b) 70 67 95 152 202 -63 176 267
of which, employees(b) 55 33 62 139 189 -54 146 160
of which, self-employed
and other(b)(c) 16 35 33 14 13 -9 30 107
Vacancies to labour
force ratio(d) 2.07 1.47 1.66 2.04 2.26 2.23 2.25 2.29
Surveys of employment intentions(e)
BCC(f) 19 8 22 29 27 29 24 20
CBI(f) 5.4 -0.4 13.8 26.7 22.3 27.9 7.8 17.6
Agents(g) 0.8 0.3 0.4 1.3 1.1 1.3 0.9 0.7
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS (including the Labour Force Survey) and Bank calculations.
(a) Unless otherwise stated.
(b) Changes relative to the previous quarter in thousands. Figures for 2015 Q4 are data for the three months to
November 2015.
(c) Other comprises unpaid family workers and those on government-supported training and employment
programmes classified as being in employment.
(d) Excludes vacancies in agriculture, forestry and fishing. Average is 2001 Q2 to 2007. Figure for 2015 Q4
shows vacancies in December relative to economically active population in the three months to November.
(e) Measures for the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the
CBI (manufacturing, financial services and business/consumer/professional services) are weighted together
using employee jobs shares from Workforce Jobs. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
(f) Net percentage balance of companies expecting their workforce to increase over the next three months.
(g) End-quarter observation. The scores refer to companies’ employment intentions over the next six months.
The scores are on a scale of -5 to +5.
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
2012 13 14 15 16
Per cent
Projection
Three-month
 unemployment rate
Monthly projections
 in November
0.0
Sources: Labour Force Survey (LFS) and Bank calculations.
(a) The magenta diamonds show Bank staff’s central projections for the headline
unemployment rate for September, October, November and December 2015, at the time of
the November Report. The green diamonds show the current staff projections for the
headline unemployment rate for December 2015, January, February and March 2016. The
bands on either side of the diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on
one root mean squared error of past Bank staff forecasts for the three-month LFS
unemployment rate.
Chart 3.4 Unemployment has fallen further
Bank staff’s near-term unemployment rate projection(a) 
22 Inflation Report February 2016
Recent developments in average hours worked
The number of hours people want to work is an important
aspect of labour supply. Prior to the recession, there had been
a long-standing downward trend in average hours worked
(Chart A). While shifts between full-time and part-time
employment do not account for much of that trend, during the
crisis average hours fell sharply as the share of part-time
employment rose markedly. The rise in average hours over
2012–14 partly reflected some fallback in the share of
part-time work and partly a fall in the amount of leave taken.
In May 2015, the MPC judged that the level of average hours
was likely to rise slightly further in the near term, given that
the number of additional hours that people reported they
wanted to work remained elevated (Chart B), before returning
towards its long-term downward trend.(1) Over the past year,
however, average hours have fallen and appear to be returning
more rapidly to their underlying trend than previously
projected.(2) This box examines the recent developments in
average hours in more detail and what they imply for the
outlook.
The structural trend towards part-time employment
will continue to weigh on average hours
The increase in the share of those in part-time work (Chart C),
reflects, in part, the increasing average age of the workforce:
older people generally prefer to work fewer hours. An estimate
of the effect of the changing population mix on the share of
part-time employment, based on the pre-crisis shares in
different age and gender cohorts, suggests that this
demographic effect is likely to have supported a large part of
the increase in part-time employment but not all.
There have also been significant moves around that
longer-term trend. During the crisis the part-time share rose
markedly, further pushing down average hours worked. At the
same time part-time employees responding to the Labour
Force Survey (LFS) reported, on average, that they wanted to
work more hours (Chart B), suggesting this in part reflected
slack in the labour market. Some of the sharp increase in the
share of part-time work unwound as the economy began to
recover — in particular, as people previously working part-time
moved into full-time employment. But that share has been
broadly stable since 2014, above a level consistent with the
longer-term demographic trend. Despite the part-time share
31.0
31.5
32.0
32.5
33.0
33.5
1996 99 2002 05 08 11 14
Hours
0.0
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2015 Q4. Based on ONS data to November 2015.
Chart A Average hours worked had been on a long-term
downward trend
Average weekly hours(a)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14
Self-employed
Part-time involuntary
Part-time voluntary
Full-time
Net
Hours
+
_
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Number of net additional hours that the currently employed report that they would like
to work, on average, per week calculated from LFS microdata. Data are non seasonally
adjusted. Calculation based on Bell, D and Blanchflower, D (2013), ‘How to measure
underemployment?’, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper No. 13–7.
Chart B Additional desired hours have declined recently
Net additional desired hours(a)
(1) For a discussion of slack and average hours see Weale, M (2014), ‘Slack and the labour
market’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/
speech716.pdf.
(2) For a discussion of the longer-run factors influencing average hours worked see
Weale, M (2016), ‘What’s in a week’s work?’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech874.pdf.
24
25
26
27
28
1996 99 2002 05 08 11 14
Per cent of total employment
Demographic contribution to
 part-time employment(a)
Part-time employment
0
Sources: Labour Force Survey, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Demographic contribution to part-time employment is calculated by applying average age
and gender part-time employment shares for 2002–07 to population data by standard age
and gender groupings used in the LFS.
Chart C Demographic changes have continued to
support a rise in the share of part-time work
Share of part-time employment: actual and demographic
contribution 
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 23
remaining elevated, the number of additional hours those
working part-time want to work has been declining, in part
reflecting a decrease in the share of part-time employees that
report they could not find a full-time job. That could suggest
that there is little slack remaining in average hours.
While the share of part-time employment is projected to fall
back some way further towards its demographic trend in the
near term, pushing up average hours, the extent of this fall
may be limited: as real wages continue to rise, more people
may prefer to work part-time.(1)
The gap between usual and actual hours worked is
normalising
In addition to asking about how many hours people actually
worked in a week and their desired hours, the LFS also asks
households about the number of hours they usually work and
the reasons for any difference between that and their actual
hours.
Actual average hours rose by more than usual hours during the
recovery, which was almost entirely accounted for by a
reduction in leave taken (Chart D). Since early 2014, however,
this effect has been unwinding as the amount of leave taken
has started to recover, though it remains some way below its
pre-crisis level. This recovery in leave taken may have been
driven by recent strong growth in real wages and increased job
security, reducing the desire to work additional hours. If the
amount of leave taken continues to return to a more normal
level, the past boost to average hours from this factor will
continue to unwind.
Average hours worked are projected to decline further
Taking this evidence together, the MPC has reassessed the
outlook for average hours, revising down its estimate of the
equilibrium level. Average hours are now projected to decline
in the near term, reflecting the effect of a continued recovery
in leave taken that is only partly offset by a slight fall in the
share of part-time work. Beyond this, the structural effect of
an ageing workforce is expected to lead to a further gradual
decline in average hours worked.
(1) See Chart 6 on page 11 of Weale (2016), op. cit., for evidence of the relationship
between real wages and average hours.
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
1996 99 2002 05 08 11 14
Hours
0.0
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Four-quarter average. Exceptional volatility in 1997 Q4, 2004 Q4 and 2005 Q4 has been
smoothed by using the average of the adjacent quarters.
Chart D The amount of leave taken is recovering
Average weekly leave(a)
on the degree to which it reflects underlying productivity
growth, such as innovation and improved resource allocation,
as opposed to temporary cyclical factors.
In November, the MPC judged that some of the recent pickup
in productivity growth was likely to have been cyclical, as
some indicators of companies’ capacity utilisation suggested
they were operating above pre-crisis normal levels. The
relative stability in these indicators of capacity pressures over
the past year or so (Chart 3.8), however, suggests that
capacity utilisation is more likely to be around than above
normal levels. That, combined with the sustained growth in
hourly productivity, has led the MPC to judge that this is more
likely to represent underlying productivity growth.
In addition, there are a number of factors that are likely to be
temporarily weighing on productivity growth. One of those is
the effect of changes in the composition of the workforce.
Net employment growth has been concentrated in
lower-skilled roles and other characteristics typically
associated with lower pay (Section 3.4). To the extent that
this is associated with less productive roles, this may have
dragged on measured productivity growth. But this drag will
0
1
2
3
4
5
1993 95 97 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Under six months
 Six to twelve months
Over twelve months
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The number of people unemployed in each duration category, divided by the economically
active population. Dashed lines are averages from 2002 to 2007.
Chart 3.5 Long-term unemployment remains elevated
Unemployment rates by duration(a)
24 Inflation Report February 2016
only continue for as long as employment growth continues to
be relatively concentrated in these lower-skilled jobs.
A factor weighing on productivity growth over a longer period
is likely to have been impaired resource reallocation. The
share of loss-making companies remains elevated. As these
businesses either improve their performance, are taken over or
exit the market, that could add to productivity growth.
Further, job-to-job flows have been below pre-crisis rates for
much of the recovery. To the extent that this has been
associated with fewer people than normal moving into roles
where they are more productive, that will have weighed on
productivity growth. As confidence in the labour market
continues to improve, job-to-job flows are likely to rise
further, which could support productivity growth.
Four-quarter productivity growth is projected to rise modestly
in the near term and continue at a relatively steady pace over
the next year, as the temporary factors weighing on it
dissipate. Moreover, strong growth in business investment
(Section 2) should also support labour productivity through
increases in the capital stock.
3.3 Overall slack in the economy
The bottom-up indicators discussed above — such as
unemployment — suggest that overall slack has continued to
be absorbed and point to only a small degree of slack
remaining in the economy, broadly consistent with the MPC’s
expectation in November. There is a great degree of
uncertainty around any such estimates, however, as potential
supply cannot be directly observed. An alternative perspective
is provided by top-down statistical filters that decompose
output into a trend and cyclical component. The central
tendency of a range of these measures also indicates that only
a small degree of slack is likely to remain in the economy. The
MPC’s best collective judgement is, therefore, that output is
currently likely to be close to its potential level. There is
considerable uncertainty around that judgement and a range
of views among MPC members.
3.4 Wages
Average pay growth remains weak and softened during the
second half of 2015 (Chart 3.1). While some easing in pay
growth was projected at the time of the November Report, as
the sharp pickup in wages in late 2014 dropped out of the
annual comparison, four-quarter pay growth was weaker than
expected at 2% in the three months to November.
The weakness in pay growth and recent slowing are at odds
with the continued improvement in other labour market
conditions, such as the sharp falls in unemployment
(Section 3.2). While it is possible that this reflects greater
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14
Output per hour
Per cent
Output per person
+
_
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Output is the backcast for the final estimate of GDP. The diamonds show Bank staff’s
central projection for 2015 Q4. Adjusted for expected revisions following the incorporation
of the latest ONS population estimates and projections.
Chart 3.6 Hourly productivity growth has been stronger
than in recent years
Measures of four-quarter labour productivity growth(a)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Total factor productivity
Capital per hour(b)
Output per hour (per cent)
Percentage points
+
_
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) See footnote (a) to Chart 3.6. Percentage change on a year earlier. Total factor productivity is
calculated as a residual. The diamond shows Bank staff’s central projection for hourly labour
productivity growth in 2015 Q4.
(b) Fixed capital stock, including structures, machinery, vehicles, computers, purchased software,
own-account software, mineral exploration, artistic originals and R&D. Calculations are based
on Oulton, N and Wallis, G (2015), ‘Integrated estimates of capital stocks and services for the
United Kingdom: 1950–2013’, Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. 1342.
Chart 3.7 Total factor productivity has accounted for
most of the pickup in labour productivity growth
Contributions to four-quarter hourly labour productivity growth(a)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
1999 2003 07 11 15
Differences from 1999 Q1–2007 Q3 averages
(number of standard deviations)
BCC
Agents
CBI +
_
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures are produced by weighting together surveys from the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing
and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the CBI (manufacturing, financial
services, business/consumer/professional services and distributive trades) using shares in
nominal value added. The surveys are adjusted to have a mean of zero and a variance of one
over 1999 Q1 to 2007 Q3. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
Chart 3.8 Little sign of spare capacity within companies
Survey indicators of capacity utilisation(a)
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 25
slack in the labour market, there are a number of other factors
that appear to be temporarily weighing on wage growth. Not
all explain the precise pattern of wage growth, however.
One factor that may have contributed to the softening in
wage growth is slower productivity growth (Section 3.2).
Indeed, when calculated on a per head basis, which is most
relevant for pay per person, productivity growth is likely to
have slowed to 0.3% in the four quarters to Q4, following a
period of growth around 0.8% (Chart 3.6). An influence on
measured wage growth, which may also be reflected in
productivity growth, is changes in the composition of the
workforce. Roles that tend to be associated with lower pay,
such as lower-skilled positions, have continued to form a
larger-than-usual share of net employment growth. Although
data for Q4 are not yet available, Bank staff estimate that the
drag from these compositional factors increased to around
1 percentage point in 2015 Q3 (Chart 3.9). Such effects will,
however, only drag on wage growth for as long as the
composition of the workforce continues to shift.
The low level of headline inflation (Section 4) may have also
contributed to the softening in wage growth. Following falls in
the prices of energy, food and other imported goods, real
wage growth has picked up strongly and is close to its
pre-crisis average rate (Chart 3.10). The strength in real wage
growth and, thereby, households’ purchasing power may have
reduced the pressure on employers to increase nominal wage
growth, temporarily offsetting some of the impact of
tightening labour market conditions. As the external
influences on inflation wane, those pressures are likely to
reassert themselves, pushing up nominal wage growth.
Subdued labour market turnover may have also limited the
pressure on employers to raise wages substantially to retain
staff and so contributed to the broader weakness in wage
growth. Job-to-job flows have been below pre-crisis levels for
much of the recovery and the Bank’s Agents report that
businesses are awarding larger pay increases only to key staff,
rather than across the board. As confidence in the labour
market and the flow of people changing roles rises, employers
might find it necessary to award greater pay rises more
broadly to retain staff. It is also possible that for some
occupations an increased ability to hire people from abroad
could have reduced the sensitivity of wage growth to domestic
labour market conditions.
Overall, the near-term outlook for wage growth is projected to
be somewhat weaker than in November. Most survey
measures of wage pressures suggest wage growth is unlikely to
pick up significantly in the near term (Table 3.C). But as the
factors weighing on wage growth dissipate, it is projected to
rise towards its pre-crisis average rate (Section 5).
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
2003 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Nominal pay
Real pay(b)
2002–07 averages
+
_
(a) Whole-economy total pay excluding bonuses and arrears of pay.
(b) Deflated by CPI.
Chart 3.10 Real wage growth is close to its pre-crisis
average rate
Regular average weekly earnings: real and nominal(a)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage point contribution relative to average
+
_
Tenure
Age
Industry
Qualification Other(b)
Occupation
Total compositional effect
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Estimates are shown relative to their averages over 1995 Q2–2015 Q3. Estimates of the
effect of individual and job characteristics are derived from a regression of these
characteristics on levels of employee pay using Labour Force Survey data. The estimate of
the total compositional effect is obtained by combining these estimates with changes in the
composition of the labour force.
(b) Other includes gender, region of residence, whether working full-time and whether in public
sector employment.
Chart 3.9 The changing composition of employment
continued to weigh on wage growth in Q3
Estimates of the contribution of employment characteristics to
four-quarter wage growth(a)
Table 3.C Most survey measures point to little acceleration in
wage growth
Indicators of wage growth
 Averages
 2002–07 2010–12(a) 2014 2015 2015 2015
 H1 Q3 Q4
CBI(b) n.a. 1.6 2.0 2.1 2.4 2.5
REC(c) 56.7 52.4 63.1 63.1 61.1 60.2
Agents(d) 2.4 1.3 1.9 2.1 2.0 2.0
CIPD(e) n.a. 1.2 2.0 1.9 2.0 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI (all rights reserved), CIPD, KPMG/REC/Markit and Bank calculations.
(a) Unless otherwise stated.
(b) Measures of expected wages over the year ahead for manufacturing, financial services, distribution and
service sector, weighted together using employee job shares from Workforce Jobs.
(c) Quarterly averages of measures for permanent and temporary placements weighted together using
employee job shares. A reading above 50.0 indicates growth on the previous month and those below
50.0 indicate a decrease. The greater the divergence from 50.0, the greater the rate of change signalled
by the index.
(d) End-quarter observation for manufacturing and services weighted together using employee job shares. The
scores refer to companies’ labour costs over the past three months compared with the same period a year
earlier. The scores are on a scale of -5 to +5.
(e) Pay increase intentions (excluding bonuses) over the coming year. Data only available since 2012. 
26 Inflation Report February 2016
Table 4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in November Developments since November
Household energy prices Broadly on track
• Domestic gas prices to fall by 5% by the
spring.
• Domestic electricity prices to remain
unchanged.
• Still expect domestic gas prices to fall by
5% by the spring.
• Still expect domestic electricity prices to
remain unchanged.
Import prices Stronger than expected
• Import prices expected to remain little
changed in 2016 H1.
• Although import prices excluding fuels
fell in the four quarters to 2015 Q3, they
are expected to rise in 2016 H1.
Unit labour costs Weaker than expected
• Four-quarter growth in whole-economy
unit labour costs to reach 2¼% by Q1.
• Whole-economy unit labour cost growth
expected to have fallen to 1.4% in Q4.
Inflation expectations Broadly on track
• Indicators of inflation expectations
continue to be broadly consistent with
the 2% target.
• Most measures of inflation expectations
have been broadly flat over 2015 H2 as a
whole. On balance, measures are broadly
consistent with the 2% target.
CPI inflation picked up to 0.2% in December, as the past falls in energy prices began to drop out of
the annual comparison and core inflation strengthened. Inflation is projected to increase further in
the coming months but a little less quickly than anticipated in November, largely reflecting recent
falls in oil prices. The depreciation of sterling, however, should mean the drag from import prices
fades a little more rapidly than previously projected. Four-quarter unit labour cost growth probably
fell to 1.4% in Q4 but is projected to strengthen over 2016, reducing the drag on CPI inflation from
subdued domestic costs. Inflation expectations remain broadly consistent with the MPC’s 2%
target.
4.1 Consumer price developments
CPI inflation picked up to 0.2% in December, from -0.1% in
September (Chart 4.1). Since inflation remains more than
1 percentage point away from the MPC’s 2% target, the
Governor has written a fifth consecutive open letter to the
Chancellor as required by the MPC’s remit.(1) As explained in
that letter, the vast majority of the current weakness in
inflation relative to the target is accounted for by energy, food
and other goods prices (Chart 4.2).
The increase in inflation over the past three months mainly
reflects the effects of past falls in energy, food and other
goods prices beginning to drop out of the annual comparison.
In addition, the contribution from airfares, which can be
volatile, increased. CPI inflation was, however, 0.2 percentage
points weaker in December than expected at the time of the
November Report, mainly reflecting further falls in oil and
food prices (Section 4.2).
A range of measures of core inflation also picked up in
December, averaging 1.3%, compared with 1.0% in September
(Chart 4.3).(2) In addition to the pickup in the contribution of
airfares, the increase in core inflation reflects a broader pickup
in services inflation, with contacts of the Bank’s Agents
reporting buoyant demand in some consumer services sectors.
Nevertheless, core inflation remains relatively low, largely
reflecting past falls in import prices and muted domestic cost
growth (Section 4.3).
4 Costs and prices
1
0
1
2
3
4
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July Jan.
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
2013 14
Projection
15 16
CPI
+
–
Chart 4.1 CPI inflation expected to have picked up further
in January
Bank staff’s projection for near-term CPI inflation(a)
(a) The green diamonds show Bank staff’s central projection for CPI inflation in October,
November and December 2015 at the time of the November Inflation Report. The blue
diamonds show the current staff projection for January, February and March 2016. The
bands on each side of the diamonds show the root mean squared error of the projections for
CPI inflation one, two and three months ahead made since 2004.
(1) The letter can be found at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/cpiletter040216.pdf.
(2) For a detailed discussion of core inflation measures see the box on pages 28–29 of the
August 2015 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/aug.pdf.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 27
CPI inflation is expected to have picked up to 0.4% in January
(Chart 4.1), as past falls in energy and food prices continued
to drop out of the annual comparison, more than offsetting a
fallback in the contribution of airfares. Over the first half of
2016 as a whole, however, inflation is projected to be broadly
stable: past falls in food prices will continue to drop out of the
annual comparison, and core inflation is projected to pick up
slightly, but these effects are likely to be broadly offset by the
drag from the recent falls in oil prices (Chart 4.2).
Further ahead, the outlook for inflation will depend on the
pace at which the drags on inflation from imported price
pressures and subdued domestic costs, in particular unit
labour costs, fade (Section 4.3). The outlook for inflation is
also likely to depend on developments in inflation
expectations and other nominal indicators (Section 4.4).
4.2 Near-term cost pressures
CPI inflation is sensitive to global pricing pressures. Changes
in global energy and food prices, in particular, affect inflation
relatively quickly and, in the absence of further shocks, will
drop out of the annual inflation rate further ahead. Global
energy and food prices fell materially over 2015. These factors
account for the vast majority of the 0.7 percentage point
average reduction in the projection for CPI inflation over
2016 H1, since the August 2015 Report.
Energy prices
Reflecting falls in spot oil prices (Section 1), petrol prices
remain lower than a year ago and subtracted 0.4 percentage
points from CPI inflation in December (Chart 4.4). US dollar
oil futures prices, on which the MPC’s projections are
conditioned, are on average US$18 per barrel lower over the
next three years than in the run-up to the November Report, a
fall of 31%. In sterling terms, futures prices are 26% lower
than in November. Those falls in oil prices mean that the drag
from petrol prices on inflation in 2016 is now projected to be
0.3 percentage points larger than anticipated in November,
and to drop out of the annual rate by early 2017, several
months later than projected in November.
Wholesale gas spot and futures prices, which make up a
significant proportion of the cost of retail gas, have also fallen,
by around 20% since the November Report, and by around
50% over the past two years (Chart 4.5). The speed at which
changes in wholesale gas prices are passed through to
domestic energy bills is variable and will depend on how
persistent the change is expected to be and the extent to
which energy suppliers have already agreed contracts for
future wholesale gas supplies at previous prices. The major
domestic energy suppliers cut their gas prices in early 2015 by
around 5%, and one supplier cut its gas prices by a further 5%
in 2015 Q3. In the run-up to the February Report, two other
suppliers had also announced a cut to their gas prices of 5% —
2
0
2
4
6
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Other goods(b) (35%)
Energy (8%)
Food and non-alcoholic
 beverages (11%)
Services (47%) CPI (per cent)
Percentage points
Projection(c)
+
–
Chart 4.2 The drag on inflation from energy price falls is
likely to persist in 2016 H1
Contributions to CPI inflation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Department of Energy and Climate Change, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Contributions to annual CPI inflation. Figures in parentheses are weights in the CPI basket in
2015, and may not sum to 100 due to rounding.
(b) Calculated as the difference between CPI inflation and the other contributions identified in
the chart.
(c) Bank staff estimates. Electricity, gas and other fuels estimates are conditioned on the
assumption that utilities companies reduce gas prices by an average of 5% in early 2016.
Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department of Energy and Climate Change petrol price
data for January 2016 and are then based on the February 2016 sterling oil futures curve
shown in Chart 4.4.
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1997 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Range of core CPI measures(a)
CPI
+
–
Chart 4.3 Core inflation measures have risen but remain
relatively low
CPI inflation and measures of core CPI inflation
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Swathe includes measures of core CPI, all adjusted by Bank staff for changes in the rate of
VAT, though there is uncertainty around the precise impact of those changes. It includes
measures of CPI excluding: food and energy; food, non-alcoholic beverages and energy;
food, alcohol, energy and tobacco; food, alcohol, energy, tobacco and education; food,
non-alcoholic beverages, alcohol, energy and tobacco; food, non-alcoholic beverages,
alcohol, energy, tobacco and education. It also includes the weighted median inflation rate
of the 85 CPI sub-components and a measure where component weights in CPI are
multiplied by the inverse of the past volatility of that component. 
28 Inflation Report February 2016
one from February and one from March. In the MPC’s
projections, the other three major household suppliers are
assumed to reduce their prices by a similar amount in early
2016, in line with the assumption in November (Table 4.A).
Due to the recent further falls in wholesale prices, domestic
suppliers are assumed to reduce gas prices in late 2016 by a
greater amount than previously assumed, and to reduce them
a little further in 2017. There is, however, a great deal of
uncertainty around how quickly any cuts in gas prices will take
place. Overall, the drag from domestic energy prices on CPI
inflation is assumed to wane slightly to around 0.1 percentage
points in the near term, before picking up again to around a
quarter of a percentage point over the year from 2016 Q3.
Food prices
Although US dollar prices of agricultural commodities have
decreased by 4% since the November Report (Section 1), in
sterling terms they have risen. Food prices are expected to be
broadly stable in the near term, and, as past falls drop out of
the annual comparison, the negative contribution of food to
CPI inflation is projected to fade (Chart 4.2).
Near-term indicators of supply chain pricing pressure
In addition to the effects described above, falls in food and
energy prices will also have indirect effects on inflation
through their impact on the costs of other goods and services.
More generally, the degree to which companies pass through
changes in the cost of their overall inputs to consumer prices
is a key factor influencing inflation in the near term. There
currently appears to be little sign of inflationary pressure at
the start of the supply chain. Manufacturing sector output
prices have fallen in recent months and, excluding food and
energy, output prices have been broadly flat. Services
producer price inflation also remains subdued.
Judging how quickly supply chain developments affect CPI
inflation is not straightforward. A recent survey of corporate
pricing carried out by the Bank’s Agents found that pricing
intentions among consumer-facing companies had generally
remained soft.(1) Respondents expected further downward
pressure on prices over the next year from energy costs,
competition and higher productivity. Partly offsetting those,
respondents expected upward pressure from higher costs of
labour and domestic inputs and planned increases in margins.
4.3 Medium-term cost pressures
Beyond the near term, and absent further large movements in
global energy and food prices, the outlook for inflation will
depend on the pace at which the drags on inflation from other
imported price pressures and subdued domestic costs, in
particular labour costs, fade.
0
20
40
60
80
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16
Change between November 2015 and February 2016 Reports(a) (right-hand scale)
Change between August and November 2015 Reports(a) (right-hand scale)
Contribution at time of August 2015 Report(a) (right-hand scale)
Contribution at time of February 2016 Report(a) (right-hand scale)
£ per barrel Percentage points
Projection
+
–
Sterling oil prices(b) (left-hand scale)
Chart 4.4 Fuel prices projected to drag on inflation for
longer than in the November Report
Sterling oil prices and contribution of fuels to CPI inflation
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Department of Energy and Climate Change, ONS,
Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Bank staff estimates of the fuels and lubricants component of CPI inflation at the time of the
August 2015, November 2015 and February 2016 Reports use Department of Energy and
Climate Change petrol price data for July 2015, October 2015 and January 2016 respectively,
and are then based on the August 2015, November 2015 and February 2016 sterling oil
futures curve respectively. For a description of the August and November 2015 futures
curves, see footnote (c) to Chart 4.4 in the November 2015 Report.
(b) Monthly averages of the oil price and the futures curve. The oil price is the Brent forward
price for delivery in 10–25 days’ time, converted into sterling. The futures curve is the
average during the fifteen working days to 27 January 2016.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
2007 09 11 13 15 17
Wholesale gas price(a)
February 2014
 Inflation Report
 futures curve(b)
Pence per therm
November 2015 Inflation Report
 futures curve(b)
February 2016 Inflation Report
 futures curve(b)
Chart 4.5 Wholesale gas prices have fallen further since
November
Sterling wholesale gas prices
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) One-day forward price of UK natural gas.
(b) Averages during the fifteen working days to 5 February 2014, 28 October 2015 and
27 January 2016 respectively.
(1) For more details, see the box on page 6 of the 2015 Q4 Agents’ summary of business
conditions; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/agentssummary/
2015/q4.pdf.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 29
Import prices
One factor reducing businesses’ costs and CPI inflation has
been falls in non-fuel import prices. That mainly reflects the
impact of the past appreciation of sterling: between the start
of 2013 and 2015 Q2, foreign export prices in foreign currency
terms fell by around 1%, whereas in sterling terms they fell by
13% (Chart 4.6). UK import prices excluding fuels are
estimated by the ONS to have fallen by 5% during that
period.(1) Changes in foreign export prices tend to be passed
through to import prices rapidly and, therefore, no further
impact on import prices from the past appreciation in sterling
is anticipated.
Since Q2, foreign export prices in foreign currency terms
appear to have fallen further (Section 1), which will weigh on
import price inflation. But that effect is likely to be more than
offset by the 3½% depreciation in sterling since November,
such that import price inflation is projected to rise in the near
term. As explained in the box on pages 28–29 of the
November Report, the precise speed of pass-through of
changes in the exchange rate will vary over time and will
depend on the factors driving the change and economic
conditions, including how persistent the depreciation proves
to be.
What will also matter for CPI inflation is the extent and timing
of the pass-through of those changes in import prices to
consumer prices. As explained in the November Report, that
pass-through is uncertain. It is estimated to be full but
gradual, on average, with most of the change passed through
over a three-year period. On balance, the MPC judges that the
fall in import prices weighed on CPI inflation by around half a
percentage point in 2015 Q4. That drag is projected to
diminish more rapidly than anticipated in November, with the
impact of sterling’s depreciation more than offsetting softer
world export price inflation (Section 5).
Labour costs
In addition to imported costs, domestic cost pressures are a
key driver of CPI inflation. In Q3, indicators of domestically
generated inflation, on average, remained subdued but broadly
stable (Chart 4.7). Labour costs represent the majority of the
domestic cost of producing output. So growth in unit labour
costs, the average labour cost of producing a unit of output,
will be an important indicator and determinant of cost
pressures.
There are several ways of measuring unit labour costs
(Table 4.B). The rates of growth in these measures generally
tend to move closely together, although at times they diverge
(Chart 4.8). In the four quarters to Q3, growth in these
measures was between 1¾% and 2¾%, a relatively narrow
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Foreign export prices
 in sterling terms(a)
UK import price deflator(b)
Foreign export prices in foreign currency(c)
+
–
Chart 4.6 Past sterling appreciation has dragged on
UK import price inflation
UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel
Sources: Bank of England, CEIC, Eurostat, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) Domestic currency non-oil export prices of goods and services of 51 countries weighted
according to their share in UK imports, divided by the sterling effective exchange rate. The
sample does not include any major oil exporters.
(b) Goods and services deflator excluding fuels and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(c) Domestic currency non-oil export prices as defined in footnote (a).
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Average of DGI measures
Range of DGI measures(a)
Whole-economy unit labour costs
+
–
Chart 4.7 Domestically generated inflation remained
broadly flat in Q3
Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Includes: whole-economy unit labour costs and private sector AWE total pay divided by
private sector productivity, as defined in Table 4.B; the GDP deflator; the GDP deflator
excluding government; and the services producer prices index.
(1) As discussed in the November Report, the MPC did not take a steer from the import
price data available at that time because of greater-than-usual uncertainty due to a
number of data issues. The ONS has since published revised import price data.
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Whole-economy
 unit labour costs
Whole-economy
 unit wage costs
Whole-economy AWE
 total pay divided
 by productivity
Whole-economy AWE
 regular pay divided
 by productivity
Private sector AWE
 total pay divided
 by productivity
Private sector AWE
 regular pay divided
 by productivity
Percentage changes on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 4.8 Measures of unit labour cost growth have
strengthened over the past year
Measures of unit labour costs(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Based on the measures defined in Table 4.B.
30 Inflation Report February 2016
range and a material pickup compared to the negative rates
observed during 2013–14.
The broadest measure, whole-economy unit labour cost
growth, which uses National Accounts compensation data and
the backcast for GDP growth, eased slightly to 1.6% in Q3
(Chart 4.9). That was lower than the 2.2% expected in the
November Report, and unit labour cost growth is expected to
have edged down further to 1.4% in Q4. The fallback in unit
labour cost growth in 2015 H2 reflects slowing wage growth
(Section 3), as well as softer growth in non-wage costs, which
include National Insurance and pension contributions. The
slowing in these components has been only partially offset by
weaker productivity growth. As wage growth strengthens,
further outstripping productivity growth, unit labour cost
growth is projected to recover to around 2% by 2016 Q2,
reducing the drag on inflation from domestic costs.
The extent to which increases in labour costs put upward
pressure on CPI inflation will depend on the extent to which
businesses pass them through to consumer prices, rather than
absorbing them in their margins. An estimate of
consumer-facing companies’ profit margins, in aggregate,
appears to be above its past average. So, as labour cost
growth picks up, some of that may be absorbed in lower
margins, rather than being reflected in higher prices.
4.4 Inflation expectations and other nominal
indicators
Inflation expectations may be one factor influencing the speed
at which inflation returns to target. Together with actual
inflation, these can influence households’ and companies’
wage and price-setting behaviour. The MPC monitors a range
of indicators to assess whether inflation expectations are well
anchored.
Table 4.B There are a number of ways of measuring unit labour costs
Measures of unit labour costs(a)
 Includes Includes self- Includes Includes the Main advantage of measure Percentage change
 non-wage employment bonuses public sector in four quarters
 costs(b) income(c) to 2015 Q3
Whole-economy unit labour costs(d) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Most comprehensive measure 1.6
Whole-economy unit wage costs(d) ✓ ✓ ✓ Excludes changes in non-wage costs, which can be erratic and so 2.3
 may not affect prices in the short term
Whole-economy AWE total pay ✓ ✓ AWE data are more timely than National Accounts data on wages 2.2
divided by productivity(e) and salaries
Whole-economy AWE regular ✓ Excludes bonuses, which can be volatile and tend to reflect labour 1.7
pay divided by productivity(e) market conditions with a lag
Private sector AWE total pay ✓ Excludes the public sector, which forms only a small share of costs 2.7
divided by productivity(e) for companies providing consumer goods and services
Private sector AWE regular pay Excludes the public sector and bonuses 2.1
divided by productivity(e)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Based on the backcast for the final estimate of GDP (or private sector output, in the case of the private sector measures).
(b) Employers’ social contributions.
(c) Calculated from mixed income, assuming that the share of employment income in that is the same as the share of employee compensation in nominal GDP less mixed income.
(d) Calculated as whole-economy labour (wage) costs divided by GDP.
(e) Productivity per head, where employment data have been adjusted for expected revisions to the Labour Force Survey to incorporate the latest ONS population estimates and projections.
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Productivity
Non-wage labour costs per head
Wages, salaries and self-employment
 income per head
Unit labour costs (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 4.9 Unit labour cost growth expected to ease a
little in Q4
Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy unit labour cost
growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Based on the whole-economy unit labour cost measure defined in Table 4.B. The diamond
shows Bank staff’s projection for 2015 Q4. Employment data have been adjusted for
expected revisions to the Labour Force Survey to incorporate the latest ONS population
estimates and projections.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 31
Most measures of households’ short-term inflation
expectations fell slightly in 2015 Q4 (Table 4.C), reversing
rises in Q3, and they remain below their historical averages.
These would, however, be expected to respond to actual
inflation and the near-term inflation outlook, both of which
remain relatively low. In contrast to households, companies’
short-term inflation expectations and measures derived from
financial market instruments remained broadly around their
past averages in Q4.
Medium and longer-term inflation expectations may be more
informative when considering whether expectations are well
anchored. Measures of households’ medium and longer-term
inflation expectations were, on balance, little changed in Q4 —
but remain below their historical averages. And according to
the Deloitte survey of chief financial officers, the proportion of
large companies that expected inflation to be below 1.5% in
two years’ time increased to slightly over half in Q4, from
around a third in 2015 H1 and almost none two years earlier.
In contrast, medium-term expectations of professional
forecasters and those derived from financial market prices
remain close to their past averages.
Overall, many measures of inflation expectations have been
broadly flat throughout 2015. On balance, the MPC judges
that inflation expectations remain well anchored and will
continue to monitor developments in inflation expectations
carefully.
The rate of increase of nominal demand relative to growth in
potential supply (Section 3) is one factor that will determine
the level of inflation in the medium term. One indicator of
future nominal demand is broad money.(1) Structural changes
in the demand for money and the difficulty of observing
potential supply, however, mean that the signal provided by
money growth can be difficult to assess in the short term.
Annual growth in aggregate broad money has remained stable
at close to 4% over the past two years (Chart 4.10). Within
that, money holdings of the corporate sector have grown
rapidly (Section 2). Nominal GDP growth, however, fell to
2.1% in the four quarters to Q3 from 4.6% a year earlier,
reflecting a lower rate of increase of the GDP deflator and the
slowing in real activity (Section 2). Looking ahead, broad
money growth is projected to be consistent with a pickup in
nominal GDP growth towards its past average rate in the
medium term, broadly consistent with CPI inflation at target.
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1999 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Broad money(a)
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Nominal GDP(b)
+
–
Chart 4.10 Broad money growth remains stable
Broad money and nominal GDP
(a) M4 excluding intermediate other financial corporations (OFCs). Intermediate OFCs are:
mortgage and housing credit corporations; non-bank credit grantors; bank holding
companies; securitisation special purpose vehicles; other activities auxiliary to financial
intermediation; and ‘other financial intermediaries’ belonging to the same financial group.
(b) At current market prices. The latest observation is 2015 Q3.
Table 4.C Indicators of inflation expectations(a)
Per cent 2000 (or start
of series) Averages 2013 2014 2015 2016
to 2007 since
averages(b) 2008 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1(c)
One year ahead inflation expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK 2.4 3.1 3.5 2.7 1.9 2.2 2.0 2.0 n.a.
Barclays Basix 2.8 2.9 2.8 2.3 1.7 1.3 1.6 1.3 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 2.5 2.5 2.7 2.0 1.2 1.2 1.5 1.3 1.2
Companies (2008 Q2)(e) n.a. 0.5 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.5 n.a.
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(f) 2.6 2.7 3.0 2.8 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.4
Two to three year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK (2009 Q1) n.a. 2.8 3.3 2.7 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.3 n.a.
Barclays Basix 3.2 3.1 3.2 2.6 2.2 1.7 2.0 1.7 n.a.
Professional forecasters
(2006 Q2)(g) 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.0
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(h) 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.1 2.9 3.1 3.1 2.9 2.9
Five to ten year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK (2009 Q1) n.a. 3.2 3.6 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.9 n.a.
Barclays Basix (2008 Q3) n.a. 3.7 3.8 3.6 3.4 2.8 3.0 3.0 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 3.5 3.2 3.5 3.0 2.7 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.7
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(i) 3.0 3.4 3.5 3.4 3.1 3.3 3.4 3.3 3.2
Memo: CPI inflation 1.6 2.6 2.6 1.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Bloomberg, CBI (all rights reserved), Citigroup, GfK, ONS, YouGov
and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Dates in parentheses indicate start dates of the data series.
(c) Financial markets data are averages from 4 January to 27 January 2016. YouGov/Citigroup data are for
January.
(d) The household surveys ask about expected changes in prices but do not reference a specific price index, and
the measures are based on the median estimated price change.
(e) CBI data for the manufacturing, business/consumer services and distribution sectors, weighted together
using nominal shares in value added. Companies are asked about the expected percentage price change
over the coming twelve months in the markets in which they compete.
(f) Instantaneous RPI inflation one year ahead implied from swaps.
(g) Bank’s survey of external forecasters, inflation rate three years ahead.
(h) Instantaneous RPI inflation three years ahead implied from swaps.
(i) Five-year, five-year forward RPI inflation implied from swaps.
(1) See King, M (2002), ‘No money, no inflation — the role of money in the economy’,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 42, No. 2, pages 162–77;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/qb/2002/qb020203.pdf.
.
32 Inflation Report February 2016
5 Prospects for inflation
CPI inflation has begun to rise, but remains close to zero due primarily to falls in the prices of
energy, food and other imported goods prices. Following a period of above-average growth,
four-quarter GDP growth has slowed by slightly more than expected. The prices of risky assets have
fallen since the November Report and oil prices, the sterling exchange rate and the yield curve are
lower. In the MPC’s central projection, conditioned on Bank Rate rising very gradually, four-quarter
GDP growth rises back to around 2½%. Although CPI inflation is likely to remain low in the
near term, once the temporary drag from energy and other imported goods prices has faded,
strengthening domestic cost growth is projected to take inflation back to the 2% target in around
two years and then slightly above it.
Since the November Report, global output and trade growth
have slowed further and the latest data suggest a softer
picture for UK activity in 2015 than previously assumed, with
four-quarter growth slowing to 2¼% by Q4 on the MPC’s
backcast. CPI inflation rose to 0.2% in December.(1) There
have been substantial falls in the prices of risky assets and oil
and gas. The MPC’s projections are conditioned on asset
prices in the fifteen working days to 27 January, when spot oil
prices were 34% lower in sterling terms than at the time of
the November Report and the sterling exchange rate was
3½% lower.(2) The path for Bank Rate implied by market
interest rates was lower, and implies that Bank Rate remains
at its current level until the end of the year before rising to
only 1.1% by 2019 (Table 5.A).
The MPC’s central projections, summarised in Table 5.B,
depend on a number of judgements, each with substantial
uncertainty around it. Global growth is projected to pick up,
but to below past average rates. That reflects continued
steady growth in the advanced economies and a slow, modest
recovery in those emerging economies that have seen a
slowdown in growth recently. Global growth is marginally
weaker than in November and it is associated with a lower
path for world trade. The risks to the central projection for
global growth remain to the downside. Domestically, private
sector spending is projected to remain resilient in the face of
(1) The reasons why inflation remains well below the 2% target and the MPC’s response
are set out in the Governor’s letter to the Chancellor; www.bankofengland.co.uk/
monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/cpiletter040216.pdf.
(2) Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on:
Bank Rate following a path implied by market yields; a constant stock of asset
purchases; the Recommendations of the Financial Policy Committee and the current
regulatory plans of the Prudential Regulation Authority; the Government’s tax and
spending plans as set out in the November 2015 Spending Review and Autumn
Statement; commodity prices following market paths; and the sterling exchange
rate remaining broadly stable. The main assumptions are set out in a table at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/febca.pdf.
Table 5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates(a)
Per cent
 2016 2017 2018 2019
 Q1(b) Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
February 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1
November 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.3
(a) The data are fifteen working day averages of one-day forward rates to 27 January 2016 and 28 October 2015
respectively. The curve is based on overnight index swap rates.
(b) February figure for 2016 Q1 is an average of realised spot rates to 27 January 2016, and forward rates
thereafter.
Table 5.B Forecast summary(a)
Projections
2015 2016 2017 2018
GDP(b) 2.5 (2.7) 2.2 (2.5) 2.4 (2.7) 2.5 (2.6)
Excluding backcast(c) 2.2 (2.4) 2.2 (2.5) 2.4 (2.7) 2.5 (2.6)
2016 Q1 2017 Q1 2018 Q1 2019 Q1
CPI inflation(d) 0.4 (0.7) 1.2 (1.5) 2.1 (2.1) 2.2
LFS unemployment rate 5.0 (5.3) 4.8 (5.2) 4.7 (4.9) 4.7
Bank Rate(e) 0.5 (0.5) 0.5 (0.7) 0.8 (1.1) 1.1
(a) Modal projections for GDP, CPI inflation and LFS unemployment. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the November 2015 Inflation Report. Projections were only available to
2018 Q4 in November.
(b) Calendar-year growth in real GDP consistent with the modal projection for four-quarter growth in real GDP.
The MPC’s projections are based on its backcast for GDP. Figure for 2015 is the MPC backcast.
(c) Figure for 2015 shows the outturn.
(d) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(e) Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. See footnotes (a) and (b) to
Table 5.A. Per cent.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 33
financial market volatility, continued subdued global growth
and domestic fiscal consolidation. The outlook is supported
by a further pickup in annual productivity growth, though
growth in average hours, and hence labour supply, is slower in
the first couple of years of the forecast than previously
projected.
In the central projection conditioned on market rates,
four-quarter GDP growth rises back to around 2½%
(Chart 5.1). The risks to the growth projection lie to the
downside (Chart 5.4). That profile is weaker than in
November; but weaker demand is matched by a lower
projection for potential supply. As in November, growth is
associated with a gradual build-up of capacity pressures, and
hence a pickup in domestic cost growth. This returns inflation
to the 2% target once the drag from external factors fades and
then pushes it slightly above the target (Chart 5.2). The
central projection for CPI inflation is modestly below that of
three months ago (Chart 5.3) for much of the forecast period
— reflecting a greater drag from energy prices and a lower
path for wage growth, only partly offset by a smaller drag
from other import prices — but broadly similar by the end.
The risks to the central projection are judged to lie to the
downside in the near term, reflecting the possibility of greater
persistence in low inflation, but to be broadly balanced
further out.
In light of the economic outlook, at its meeting ending on
3 February the MPC voted to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5% and
the stock of purchased assets at £375 billion. The factors
behind that decision are set out in the Monetary Policy
Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail in the
Minutes of the meeting.(1)
(1) The Minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2016/feb.pdf.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
ONS data
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
+
–
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. To the left of the
vertical dashed line, the distribution reflects the likelihood of revisions to the data over the past;
to the right, it reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If economic
circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective
judgement is that the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within the darkest central band
on only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to
lie within each pair of the lighter green areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the
forecast period, GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of
100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP growth can fall anywhere
outside the green area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the
light grey background. See the box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a
fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
Chart 5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Chart 5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest
rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
18 19
Chart 5.3 CPI inflation projection in November based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 depict the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. They have been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves
remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie
within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan charts are constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter red areas on 30 occasions. In any particular
quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall anywhere outside the red area of the
fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the light grey background. See the box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
34 Inflation Report February 2016
5.1 Key judgements and risks
The Committee’s four key judgements are described in more
detail below. Table 5.D provides projections for variables that
illustrate those judgements; Table 5.C provides a range of
indicators to monitor them; and Table 5.E shows indicative
projections for a range of other variables.
Key Judgement 1: global growth picks up a little but
remains below past average rates
Global growth has fallen back further over the past
three months, as emerging economies generally continued to
slow and the US economy grew by less than expected. There
have also been considerable falls in the prices of risky assets
and another significant fall in oil prices.
Developments in financial markets — including widespread
falls in equity prices and rises in corporate bond spreads — in
part seem to reflect an increase in market participants’
perceptions of risks around the global outlook stemming from
developments in China and other emerging economies. Those
financial market developments will tend to raise the cost of
capital across advanced and emerging economies.
The price of Brent crude was US$29 a barrel in the fifteen
working days to 27 January — a level last seen in 2004 and
US$19 lower than at the time of the November Report. Much
of the fall probably reflects positive news on supply — for
example, as OPEC showed increased flexibility around its
production targets. It could also in part reflect concerns about
future demand; consistent with that, industrial metals prices
have also fallen since the November Report. On balance,
more of the fall is judged likely to reflect supply factors, such
that the lower oil price is expected to support activity in net
oil-importing countries, including the United Kingdom. That
said, lower prices are likely to weigh further on activity in
commodity-exporting countries.
Annual euro-area growth has picked up, supported by past
falls in energy prices, together with an improvement in credit
conditions, and the public sector asset purchase programme
that the ECB commenced in early 2015. Headline and core
inflation have remained low, however, and since the
November Report the ECB has increased the planned size of its
asset purchase programme and reduced interest rates further.
Over the forecast period, euro-area growth is projected to
remain close to current rates such that slack continues slowly
to be absorbed and inflation gradually picks up; growth is
similar to the path three months ago, reflecting offsetting
news on asset and oil prices.
In the United States, following a further tightening of the
labour market, the FOMC raised the target range for the
federal funds rate by 25 basis points in December 2015.
US output expanded by only 0.2% in 2015 Q4, less than
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Percentage change on previous year
Projection at the time of the November Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements
 in February
+
–
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth
rates of 146 countries weighted according to their shares in UK exports.
Chart 5.5 World GDP (UK-weighted)(a)
February
November
0
1
2
3
4
1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 +–
Probability density, per cent(b)
(a) Chart 5.4 represents the cross-section of the GDP growth fan chart in 2018 Q1 for the
market interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of
purchased assets remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands in Chart 5.4 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like the fan
charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey outline
represents the corresponding cross-section of the November 2015 Inflation Report fan chart,
which was conditioned on market interest rates and the same assumption about the stock of
purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
growth being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given growth rate, specified to
one decimal place.
Chart 5.4 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in
2018 Q1 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 35
expected in the November Report. Over the forecast period,
growth is projected to remain well below past average rates
(Table 5.D), as productivity growth also remains modest. The
risks around the projections for productivity and output
growth are broadly balanced.
As advanced-economy growth has recovered,
emerging-economy growth has slowed. Although headline
growth in China remained around 7% in 2015 on official data,
that in part reflected policy support and there remain concerns
about the sustainability of such rates of growth. Those
concerns have been associated with net outflows of private
sector capital and falls in asset prices. In China, growth is
expected to decelerate further over the next three years as the
authorities continue to rebalance the economy away from
exports and investment and towards domestic consumption.
The Committee’s projections are underpinned by four key
judgements. Risks surround all of these, and the MPC will
monitor a broad range of variables to understand the degree
to which the risks are crystallising. The table below shows
Bank staff’s indicative near-term projections that are
consistent with the judgements in the MPC’s central view
evolving as expected.
Table 5.C Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements
Key judgement Likely developments in 2016 Q1 to 2016 Q3 if judgements evolve as expected
1: global growth picks up a
little but remains below past
average rates
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average a little below ½%.
• Annual euro-area HICP inflation remains close to zero in the coming months reflecting recent falls in
oil prices.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a little above ½%.
• Annual US PCE inflation of around 1%.
• Indicators of activity consistent with four-quarter PPP-weighted emerging-economy growth of around
3¾%; within that, Chinese GDP growth to average around 6½%.
• Average quarterly growth in UK exports of around ½%.
2: UK household and corporate
spending remains resilient
• Quarterly consumption growth of around ¾%.
• Quarterly business investment growth of around 1¼%.
• Credit spreads to be broadly flat in 2016.
• Quarterly housing investment growth to average around ¾%.
• Mortgage approvals for house purchase are expected to be around 76,000 a month, on average, in
2016 Q3, following a period of volatility in transactions immediately before and after the introduction
of a higher rate of stamp duty on additional properties in April 2016.
• Rates of increase in the main indices of national house prices to average around ½% per month.
3: annual productivity growth
picks up a little further
• Participation rate to remain broadly flat over the first half of this year.
• Headline LFS unemployment rate to fall slightly below 5% by the middle of the year.
• Average hours to fall by ½% by the middle of the year.
• Hourly labour productivity to increase by around 1% in the first half of this year.
4: a pickup in domestic cost
growth returns inflation to the
2% target once the drag from
external factors fades
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to evolve in line with the conditioning assumptions set out in
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/febca.pdf.
• Domestic gas prices to fall by 5% over the spring. Domestic electricity prices to remain unchanged.
• Four-quarter AWE growth to remain broadly flat at around 2% over the first half of this year.
• Four-quarter growth in whole-economy unit labour costs to pick up to 2¼% by 2016 Q3.
• Non-fuel import prices to rise by 1½% in the year to 2016 Q3.
• Indicators of inflation expectations continue to be broadly consistent with the 2% target.
36 Inflation Report February 2016
The rebalancing to date appears to have been associated with
a marked slowing in Chinese import growth. That is one factor
weighing on activity in other emerging economies, where
growth has slowed markedly in recent years, and appears to
have been particularly weak in Q4. Some of that slowing also
reflects idiosyncratic factors in individual economies and a
drag from lower prices for commodities in those countries that
export them. Financial conditions are also tightening: there
were net private sector capital outflows from China and other
emerging economies in 2015 for the first year since the 1980s
(see the box on page 7). These factors are likely to continue to
weigh on emerging-economy growth this year and even as
growth recovers it is judged likely to settle at rates below
pre-crisis averages. As discussed in the November Report, that
modest medium-term growth outlook in part reflects
structural factors such as less favourable demographic trends.
Significant downside risks remain to the outlook for emerging
economies, including China, which could have wide-ranging
impacts on other economies through commodity and financial
market prices as well as through demand.
In PPP-weighted terms, world GDP growth is projected to
grow by only 3% in 2016, below the projection three months
ago, with growth picking up only a little thereafter
(Table 5.D). That projection remains a little below those of
other forecasters. Growth is also projected to remain modest
when weighted according to UK export shares (Chart 5.5).
Downside risks to the global outlook remain. Moreover, the
global growth profile is now associated with somewhat slower
growth in world trade, largely reflecting a judgement that
Chinese import demand will continue to grow less quickly
than previously assumed.
Overall, net trade detracts from UK growth over the forecast
period but, given the 3½% depreciation in the sterling
effective exchange rate, by a little less than in the
November Report. Export and import growth are both lower
than the profiles three months ago: weaker world trade
weighs on UK exports and imports are depressed by reductions
in imports of capital goods in the oil sector (Key Judgement 2).
The current account deficit is projected to remain close to 4%
of GDP.
Key Judgement 2: UK household and corporate spending
remains resilient
UK private final domestic demand has grown at above-average
rates in recent years. That reflects both a recovery in real
incomes, as employment has grown and the costs of energy
and other imported items have fallen, and support from
receding uncertainty and an improvement in the cost and
availability of credit.
Household consumption growth was probably around
2¾% in 2015, and is projected to remain around that rate
over the forecast period. Real labour income growth is
Table 5.D MPC key judgements(a)(b)
Key Judgement 1: global growth picks up a little but remains below past average
rates
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
World GDP (UK-weighted)(c) 3 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2½ (2½) 2¼ (2¼)
World GDP (PPP-weighted)(d) 4 3¼ (3) 3 (3¼) 3¼ (3¼) 3¼ (3¼)
Euro-area GDP(e) 2¼ 1½ (1½) 1½ (1¾) 1¾ (1¾) 1½ (1½)
US GDP(f) 3 2½ (2½) 2¼ (2½) 2¼ (2¼) 2 (2)
Dollar oil prices(g) 39 43 (49) 37 (56) 42 (59) 46 (62)
Key Judgement 2: UK household and corporate spending remains resilient
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
Credit spreads(h) ¾(i) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2) 2 (2) 2 (2)
Household saving ratio(j) 8¾ 4¾ (4¾) 3 (4) 2¾ (3¼) 2¼ (2¾)
Business investment
to GDP ratio(k) 9¾ 9¾ (9¾) 10¼ (10¼) 10½ (10¾) 11 (11¼)
Key Judgement 3: annual productivity growth picks up a little further
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
Productivity(l) 2¼ 1 (1¼) 1¼ (1) 1¾ (1½) 1¾ (1¾)
Participation rate(m) 63 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½) 63¾ (63½)
Average hours(n) 32¼ 32 (32) 31¾ (32¼) 31¾ (32¼) 31¾ (32¼)
Key Judgement 4: a pickup in domestic cost growth returns inflation to the 2% target
once the drag from external factors fades
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
UK import prices(o) ¼ -6¾ (-4¾) ¾ (¾) 1¼ (1) 1¼ (1)
Unit labour costs(p) 3 1¼ (2) 2¼ (2¾) 2¼ (2¾) 2¾ (2¾)
Sources: Bank of England, BDRC Continental SME Finance Monitor, Bloomberg, BofA Merrill Lynch Global
Research, British Household Panel Survey, Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Eurostat, IMF World
Economic Outlook (WEO), ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) The MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts) are
underpinned by four key judgements. The mapping from the key judgements to individual variables is not
precise, but the profiles in the table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s key judgements.
(b) Figures show calendar-year growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the November 2015 Inflation Report.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 146 countries weighted according
to their shares in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 147 countries weighted according
to their shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e) Chained-volume measure.
(f) Chained-volume measure. Figure for 2015 is an outturn.
(g) Average level in Q4. Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices. Figure for 2015
is an outturn.
(h) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(i) Based on the weighted average of spreads for households and large companies over 2003 and 2004 relative
to the level in 2007 Q3. Data used to construct the SME spread are not available for that period. The
period is chosen as broadly representative of one where spreads were neither unusually tight nor unusually
loose.
(j) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources.
(k) Calendar-year average. Chained-volume business investment as a percentage of GDP.
(l) GDP per hour worked. GDP at market prices is based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Hours worked
have been adjusted for expected revisions to the LFS to incorporate the latest ONS population estimates
and projections.
(m) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population. The participation rate has been adjusted for expected
revisions to the LFS to incorporate the latest ONS population estimates and projections.
(n) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job.
(o) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4 of a weighted average of the goods excluding oil and erratics imports price
index and the services imports deflator.
(p) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at
market prices, based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation
of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 37
underpinned by a further pickup in annual productivity growth
(Key Judgement 3), although the support from falls in energy
and other imported goods prices lessens. The near-term
profile for growth in households’ total income is affected by a
degree of volatility in investment income, with some dividend
payments from companies to households likely to have been
brought forward in anticipation of a change in tax treatment in
2016. Although that has few implications for the level of
income in the medium term, it is likely to have supported total
income growth in 2015, and is projected to weigh on it in
2016. Robust consumer confidence — the GfK consumer
confidence balance remains close to record highs — together
with the past easing in credit conditions continue to support
household spending growth such that the saving ratio falls
back further. It is possible that consumers will decide to save
even less: in aggregate, households’ financial wealth to
income ratio remains close to past highs and the debt to
income ratio picks up only modestly over the forecast period.
Aggregate data mask variation across households, however,
and it is also possible that concerns about debt weigh more on
some households’ spending than assumed. In addition, the
continuing fiscal consolidation could act as a larger drag on
consumption growth than projected.
In contrast to the steady rise in consumption growth in recent
years, housing investment growth has been very volatile, rising
sharply in 2014 before dropping back last year. Growth is
projected to pick up over the forecast period, reaching nearly
6% in 2018. Underlying that there is a slightly larger rise in
housing starts than assumed three months ago but a slightly
smaller rise in housing transactions. The outlook depends in
part on the impact of government policies affecting the
buy-to-let sector, which has accounted for a substantial share
of the increase in mortgage lending in recent years (Section 2).
Transactions are likely to rise in anticipation of increases in
stamp duty on additional properties, including buy-to-let, in
April 2016, but fall back afterwards. Changes to the income
tax treatment of rental income in 2017 will weigh further on
the outlook. In the central projection there is a notable effect
on buy-to-let transactions but a much smaller effect on
overall housing investment. House price inflation is projected
to average 6% over the forecast period, but there is
considerable uncertainty around that projection.
Business investment has been growing around 6% a year and
that trend is judged likely to continue over the forecast period.
That is despite sharply lower capital expenditure in the oil and
gas sector, which is assumed to reduce the level of overall
business investment by around 5% by the end of the forecast
period, more than assumed three months ago (Section 2).
Outside the oil sector, companies report that they continue to
need to build capacity to meet demand, and credit conditions
remain favourable. The projection for business investment
relies, however, on companies’ continuing confidence in the
outlook: should uncertainty rise, for example about the global
Table 5.E Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections(a)
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
Household consumption(b) 3¾ 2¾ (3) 2¾ (3) 2½ (3) 2¾ (2¾)
Business investment(c) 2½ 6½ (5½) 5½ (7½) 6 (8¾) 6¼ (7¾)
Housing investment(d) 3½ 2¼ (¼) 4 (4½) 5½ (5¾) 5¾ (4¾)
Exports(e) 4½ 5½ (3¾) 2¼ (2½) 1¼ (1¾) 2 (2½)
Imports(f) 6 6¼ (3) 2½ (3¾) 2¼ (3¼) 2½ (3¼)
Real post-tax household income(g) 3 2 (3) 1 (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2¼)
Employment(h) 1 2 (1½) ¾ (1) ¾ (1) ¾ (¾)
Average weekly earnings(i) 4¼ 1¾ (2½) 3 (3¾) 3¾ (4) 4¼ (4¼)
(a) These projections are produced by Bank staff for the MPC to be consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment. Figures show calendar-year growth rates
unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the November 2015
Inflation Report.
(b) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Chained-volume measure.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending
on services associated with the sale and purchase of property.
(e) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra-community
(MTIC) fraud. Official MTIC-adjusted data are not available for exports, so headline exports data have been
adjusted by Bank staff for MTIC fraud by an amount equal to the ONS import adjustment.
(f) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of MTIC fraud.
(g) Total available household resources deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(h) Four-quarter growth rate in Q4. Employment has been adjusted for expected revisions to the LFS to
incorporate the latest ONS population estimates and projections.
(i) Four-quarter growth in Q4 in whole-economy total pay. 
38 Inflation Report February 2016
outlook, companies may put some investment plans on hold.
On the upside, however, the rate of return on corporate
capital remains high and, as the economy continues to
normalise, that could be associated with a greater boost to
capital spending.
Key Judgement 3: annual productivity growth picks up a
little further
Demand has grown faster than potential supply over the past
couple of years, reducing the extent of slack in the economy.
There is considerable uncertainty around how much slack
remains, however, and a range of views among MPC members.
In the central projection, it is assumed that slack declined a
little further in the first quarter, as expected in November, and
that only a little spare capacity remains. Over the forecast
period, the extent to which the economy can grow without
generating excess inflationary pressure therefore depends on
how quickly the economy’s supply capacity expands, and how
that affects wage and price inflation.
Although overall supply growth has been fairly stable, recent
years have been characterised by unusually rapid labour
supply growth and unusually slow productivity growth. Over
the past year, there have been signs that potential growth in
both labour supply and productivity may be returning to more
normal rates. Within labour supply, it appears that trend
participation has flattened off as has the medium-term
equilibrium unemployment rate. Although net inward
migration has risen recently, the latest ONS projections
suggest a slowing in population growth over the next three
years. The assumed medium-term equilibrium levels for
participation and unemployment are unchanged from those
three months ago although, following news in the data, the
central projection for the unemployment rate is a little lower.
The profile for average hours worked has, however, been
revised down substantially. Over 2015, average hours
unwound some of the sharp rises seen since 2012 and are
estimated to be lower in Q4 than expected in the
November Report. Evidence from the LFS suggests that much
of the fall reflects voluntary reductions in hours worked by
employees rather than lower demand from employers. In light
of that, the MPC has revised down the assumed level of
equilibrium average hours over the past year or so and over
the forecast period (see the box on pages 22–23). Over the
forecast period, average hours are projected to fall a little
further, reflecting a further normalisation in working practices
and the increasing share of older workers, who typically work
fewer hours, in the labour force.
As labour supply growth has slowed, productivity growth has
picked up. In 2015 hourly productivity growth was probably
the fastest in four years, despite a fall in Q4 (Section 3). In the
MPC’s current view, the pickup is judged largely to reflect an
underlying recovery, perhaps as resources begin to be
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 39
reallocated towards more productive uses. That means
productivity is projected to grow a little more quickly this year
than previously projected, reaching 1¾% by 2017 and settling
around that rate (Chart 5.6).
Overall, potential supply growth is projected to rise steadily
over the forecast and its composition is expected to be more
in line with historical trends as labour supply grows more
slowly and productivity more quickly than in recent years.
Relative to the paths assumed three months ago, the lower
path for average hours is judged to have weakened potential
supply growth over the past year and into the forecast period.
There remains considerable uncertainty about how quickly
supply can grow. Productivity has frequently disappointed in
recent years, in the United Kingdom as well as in other
countries, but it is possible that growth picks up faster than
anticipated given the gap between the level of UK productivity
and that in some other advanced economies. There is also
uncertainty about the extent to which strong labour supply
growth over the past few years has reflected temporary
factors such as the past weakness in real wages, which may
unwind even more than assumed in the central projection, or a
longer-lasting change in the labour market. There is also
uncertainty about how much unemployment can fall without
generating upward pressure on wages. Bank staff estimate
that the long-run equilibrium unemployment rate is around
5%, but there are risks on both sides of that estimate
(Section 3).
Key Judgement 4: a pickup in domestic cost growth returns
inflation to the 2% target once the drag from external
factors fades
Annual CPI inflation ticked up to 0.2% in December. Although
the overwhelming majority of the weakness in CPI inflation
relative to the 2% target continues to reflect energy, food and
other goods prices, a risk remains that low inflation may weigh
on wage growth and hence prove more persistent.
The 34% decline in spot sterling oil prices since the
November Report implies that the drag on annual inflation
from petrol prices is likely to intensify again in coming
months, before falling to zero in around a year’s time,
assuming that oil prices rise modestly in line with the oil
futures curve. The drag from domestic energy bills is assumed
to last a little longer: falls in wholesale gas prices are expected
to lead to further reductions in households’ gas bills this
autumn and next (Section 4). Overall, energy prices are
projected to continue to weigh on CPI inflation relative to the
2% target until late 2018, but the precise path will depend on
developments in energy markets and the timing and scale of
adjustments in domestic energy bills.
Going in the other direction, the 3½% depreciation of the
sterling effective exchange rate implies less downward
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Percentage change on previous year
Projection at the time of the November Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements
 in February
+
–
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. GDP per hour worked. GDP is at market prices and projections
are based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Hours worked have been adjusted for
expected revisions to the LFS to incorporate the latest ONS population estimates and
projections.
Chart 5.6 Productivity(a)
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16 19
Percentage change on a year earlier
+
–
Projection at the time of the November Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements
 in February
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at market prices, based on the mode of
the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation of employees and the
labour share multiplied by mixed income. The chart shows data to 2015 Q3 and projections
for four-quarter growth in Q4 thereafter.
Chart 5.7 Unit labour costs(a)
Table 5.F Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths(a)
 Mode Median Mean
2016(b) 2.2 (2.5) 2.2 (2.5) 2.2 (2.5)
2017 2.4 (2.7) 2.3 (2.6) 2.3 (2.6)
2018 2.5 (2.6) 2.4 (2.5) 2.4 (2.5)
(a) The table shows the projections for calendar-year growth of real GDP consistent with the modal, median
and mean projections for four-quarter growth of real GDP implied by the fan chart. Where growth rates
depend in part on the MPC’s backcast, revisions to quarterly growth are assumed to be independent of the
revisions to previous quarters. The figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the
November Inflation Report. The February and November projections have been conditioned on market
interest rates, and the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central
bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period.
(b) The anticipated revisions to recent estimates of quarterly GDP growth do not have implications for the
calendar-year data shown in this table.
40 Inflation Report February 2016
pressure from non-energy import prices than assumed in the
November Report, although that is partly offset by softer
world export price inflation. UK non-energy import prices
have fallen over the past year or so due to the combination of
the past appreciation of sterling and weak world export price
inflation. The drag from non-energy import prices on
CPI inflation is projected to have dissipated by the two-year
forecast point and their contribution turns slightly positive in
the third year. There is, however, considerable uncertainty
around how much and how quickly changes in sterling pass
through into consumer prices: if more of the past appreciation
is already reflected in CPI inflation, the drag over the forecast
period will be correspondingly smaller.
Overall, the drag on inflation, relative to the target, from
energy, food and other imported goods prices is projected to
have shrunk substantially by the two-year point. Although
there is uncertainty about the paths for these components and
their impact on CPI, the key uncertainty that underlies the
outlook for inflation in the medium term is the extent to
which domestic cost growth strengthens.
In recent years, growth in unit labour costs — companies’
wage costs relative to productivity, a key indicator of
domestic cost pressure — has been below rates consistent
with meeting the inflation target. Consistent with the
tightening in the labour market seen since 2013, annual cost
growth picked up, with indicators of unit labour cost inflation
changing from negative to positive (Section 4). But, more
recently, four-quarter growth in wages and labour costs
weakened by more than expected towards the end of 2015
(Section 3).
The weakening could suggest more slack than assumed.
Alternatively the period of low inflation may have weighed on
wage settlements. For example, pressure for higher pay
settlements as the labour market has tightened may have
been attenuated by the fall in energy prices and corresponding
boost to real wage growth. As the drag from external factors
on CPI inflation lessens and headline inflation picks up,
nominal wages should grow faster.
In the central projection, some of the weakness in domestic
costs is assumed to persist, so that wage and unit labour cost
growth (Chart 5.7) is weaker this year and next than in the
November projections. Under the path for Bank Rate implied
by market rates, labour market and hence domestic cost
pressures nonetheless build up sufficiently such that
CPI inflation slightly exceeds the 2% target at the two-year
point (Chart 5.8) and then rises slightly further. There are
risks on both sides of that path. On the one hand, nominal
wages could prove more sensitive to the current period of low
inflation. On the other hand, the underlying tightness in the
labour market may start feeding through to inflation more
rapidly.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 Unemployment rate, per cent
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands have the same interpretation as in Chart 5.2, and portray 90% of the probability
distribution. The calibration of this fan chart takes account of the likely path dependency of the
economy, where, for example, it is judged that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will
continue to have some effect on unemployment in successive quarters. The fan begins in
2015 Q4, a quarter earlier than the fan for CPI inflation. That is because Q4 is a staff projection
for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for October and November. The
unemployment rate was 5.1% in the three months to November, and is projected to be 5.0% in
Q4 as a whole. In the later part of the forecast period, a significant proportion of this
distribution lies below Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment
rate. There is therefore uncertainty about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Chart 5.9 Unemployment projection based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
0
1
2
3
4 Probability density, per cent(b)
1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 +–
February
November
Chart 5.8 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in
2018 Q1 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
(a) Chart 5.8 represents the cross-section of the CPI inflation fan chart in 2018 Q1 for the
market interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock
of purchased assets remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands in Chart 5.8 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like the fan
charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey outline
represents the corresponding cross-section of the November 2015 Inflation Report fan chart,
which was conditioned on market interest rates and the same assumption about the stock
of purchased assets.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
inflation being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given inflation rate, specified to one
decimal place.
Table 5.G Q4 CPI inflation
 Mode Median Mean
2016 Q4 0.9 (1.2) 0.8 (1.2) 0.8 (1.1)
2017 Q4 1.9 (2.1) 1.9 (2.0) 1.9 (2.0)
2018 Q4 2.2 (2.2) 2.2 (2.2) 2.2 (2.2)
The table shows projections for Q4 four-quarter CPI inflation. The figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the November Inflation Report. The February and November projections have been
conditioned on market interest rates, and the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 41
5.2 The projections for demand,
unemployment and inflation
Based on these judgements and the risks around them, and
under the conditioning path for Bank Rate based on market
yields, which reaches 1.1% by 2019 Q1, GDP growth is projected
to rise to around 2½% over the forecast period. That growth is
driven by resilient private domestic demand, in the face of
subdued global activity and a continuing fiscal consolidation at
home. Growth starts the forecast weaker than projected three
months ago, but ends the projection at a similar rate. Relative
to November, falls in the prices of risky assets and a weaker
profile for world trade bear down on activity, but there is more
support from sterling, oil prices and the yield curve. The risks to
the outlook remain weighted to the downside (Table 5.F),
reflecting the possibility that global activity and, in particular,
growth in emerging economies may disappoint.
UK activity is supported by steady, albeit below average,
productivity growth. Overall supply growth is weaker than
assumed three months ago, however, reflecting the lower
assumed equilibrium path for average hours. Unemployment
has fallen to 5.1%, close to its estimated long-run equilibrium
rate: overall, although the precise extent of slack in the
economy is uncertain, only a little is judged to remain, as
expected in November. Over the forecast period, the
unemployment rate falls a touch further (Chart 5.9) and
capacity pressures build. There remains considerable
uncertainty about supply growth, with risks on both sides of the
central projection.
CPI inflation is projected to pick up as the drags from energy and
other imported goods prices unwind. Under the path implied by
market interest rates, domestic cost pressures are projected to
build up sufficiently such that CPI inflation slightly exceeds the
2% target at the two-year point and then rises slightly further.
The central projection for CPI inflation is modestly below that of
three months ago for much of the forecast period — reflecting a
greater drag from energy prices and a lower path for wage
growth, only partly offset by a smaller drag from other import
prices — but broadly similar by the end. The risks to the central
projection are judged to be to the downside over the next year
(Table 5.G), reflecting the possibility of greater persistence in
low inflation, but broadly balanced thereafter. Overall, inflation
is judged a little more likely to be above the target than below it
at the three-year horizon (Chart 5.10).
Charts 5.11 and 5.12 show the MPC’s projections under the
alternative constant rate assumption. That assumption is that
Bank Rate remains at 0.5% throughout the three years of the
forecast period, before rising towards the market path over the
subsequent three years. Under that path, relative to the
market rate profile, growth is stronger and inflation returns to
the 2% target a little more quickly and is projected to be around
2½% at the end of the forecast period.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
+
– ONS data
See footnote to Chart 5.1.
Chart 5.11 GDP projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased assets
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Chart 5.12 CPI inflation projection based on constant
nominal interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased
assets
See footnote to Chart 5.2.
2016 17 18 19
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Probability of inflation at or below
the target, inverted (per cent)
Probability of inflation
above the target (per cent)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0 100
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
February
November
Chart 5.10 Inflation probabilities relative to the target
The February and November swathes in this chart are derived from the same distributions as
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 respectively. They indicate the assessed probability of inflation relative to
the target in each quarter of the forecast period. The 5 percentage points width of the swathes
reflects the fact that there is uncertainty about the precise probability in any given quarter, but
they should not be interpreted as confidence intervals.
42 Inflation Report February 2016
Other forecasters’ expectations
This box reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey
of external forecasters, carried out in January.(1) On average,
respondents expected four-quarter GDP growth to remain at
around 2¼% throughout the next three years (Table 1). This
is a touch weaker than expected three months ago, and
marginally below the MPC’s latest central forecast (Chart A).
The average of respondents’ central expectations for
CPI inflation in one year’s time, at 1.6%, remained above the
MPC’s forecast of 1.2%, while expectations further ahead were
slightly below the MPC’s central projection, which is
conditional on the path for Bank Rate implied by market
interest rates. On average, external forecasters thought there
was around a 25% probability that CPI inflation will be above
the target in one year’s time, while that probability was just
below 50% in two years’ time and just above it looking three
years ahead (Chart B).
External forecasters, on average, expect Bank Rate to rise
more gradually than projected at the time of the
November Report, with an average expectation of 2.1% in
three years’ time. This is, however, still materially higher than
implied by market interest rates. In the box on page 34 of the
November Report, the MPC set out its latest expectations
about the stock of purchased assets. Since then, central
expectations for the stock of asset purchases have moved
towards there being little change over the next three years
(Chart C). The stock is expected, on average, to fall by around
£15 billion in total over the next three years, £35 billion less
than anticipated three months ago.
(1) For detailed distributions of other forecasters’ expectations, see ‘Other forecasters’
expectations’ on the Bank’s website, available at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/febofe.pdf.
Table 1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections(a)
 2017 Q1 2018 Q1 2019 Q1
CPI inflation(b) 1.6 2.0 2.0
GDP growth(c) 2.2 2.3 2.2
LFS unemployment rate 5.0 4.8 4.8
Bank Rate (per cent) 0.9 1.6 2.1
Stock of purchased assets (£ billions)(d) 375 372 360
Sterling ERI 90.7 90.0 89.5
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 21 January 2016.
(a) For 2017 Q1, there were 25 forecasts for GDP growth, 24 for CPI inflation and Bank Rate, 23 for the
unemployment rate, 16 for the stock of asset purchases and 11 for the sterling ERI. For 2018 Q1, there were
20 forecasts for CPI inflation, GDP growth and Bank Rate, 18 for the unemployment rate, 13 for the stock
of asset purchases and 10 for the sterling ERI. For 2019 Q1, there were 19 forecasts for CPI inflation,
GDP growth and Bank Rate, 17 for the unemployment rate, 12 for the stock of asset purchases and 10 for
the sterling ERI.
(b) Twelve-month rate.
(c) Four-quarter percentage change.
(d) Original purchase value. Purchased via the creation of central bank reserves.
0
1
2
3
4
2017 Q1 2018 Q1 2019 Q1
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
MPC modal projection
Interquartile range of external forecasters
Range of external forecasters
Chart A Most forecasters expect broadly stable GDP
growth over the next three years
Forecasters’ central projections of GDP growth
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 21 January 2016.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Three years
 ahead
One year ahead
Two years
 ahead
Per cent
Chart B Perceived risks around inflation relative to target in
the medium term are broadly balanced
Average probability of above-target CPI inflation
Source: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports between February 2008
and February 2016.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 Proportion of respondents, per cent
Stock of asset purchases (£ billions)
325–350
November Report
Two years ahead February Report
Three years ahead
<325 350–375 375
Chart C Most forecasters expect the stock of asset purchases
to be unchanged over the next three years
Distribution of central expectations for the stock of asset purchases(a)
Source: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports in November 2015 and
February 2016.
(a) Projections on the boundary of these ranges are included in the upper range, eg a projection
of the stock being £350 billion is in the £350 billion–£375 billion range.
 Index of charts and tables 43
Index of charts and tables
Charts
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.1 International forward interest rates 1
1.2 Renminbi exchange rates 2
1.3 Sterling exchange rates 2
1.4 Option-implied asymmetries for selected bilateral
exchange rates 2
1.5 US dollar oil prices 4
1.6 Contributions to annual growth in oil supply 4
1.7 International equity prices 4
1.8 UK equity indices for selected sectors 5
1.9 Implied volatility for US equity prices 5
1.10 International corporate bond spreads 5
1.11 Contributions to calendar-year growth in UK-weighted
world GDP 6
1.12 Trade and investment in China 8
1.13 Unemployment rates in selected euro-area countries 9
1.14 US labour market indicators 9
What is the impact of capital flows on the outlook for
emerging economies? 7
A EME GDP growth and net capital flows 7
B EME bank lending conditions 7
2 Demand and output 10
2.1 Bank staff’s projections for near-term output growth 11
2.2 Contributions to average quarterly GDP growth by
expenditure component 11
2.3 Contributions to average quarterly GVA growth by
output sector 12
2.4 Contributions to four-quarter growth in real post-tax
labour income 13
2.5 Household saving out of available income 13
2.6 Housing investment 13
2.7 Mortgage approvals and housing transactions 15
2.8 House prices and indicators of house price inflation 16
2.9 Contributions to four-quarter business investment
growth 16
2.10 Exports of goods and survey indicators 17
2.11 Relative import prices and imports relative to
import-weighted demand 17
2.12 UK current account 18
Conditions in credit and financial markets 14
A UK long-term real interest rate 14
B Private sector credit growth relative to GDP growth 15
C Household and corporate lending 15
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.1 Average weekly earnings: total and regular pay 19
3.2 Labour force participation rate 20
3.3 Contributions to the change in the participation rate
since 2008 Q3 20
3.4 Bank staff’s near-term unemployment rate projection 21
3.5 Unemployment rates by duration 23
3.6 Measures of four-quarter labour productivity growth 24
3.7 Contributions to four-quarter hourly labour
productivity growth 24
3.8 Survey indicators of capacity utilisation 24
3.9 Estimates of the contribution of employment
characteristics to four-quarter wage growth 25
3.10 Regular average weekly earnings: real and nominal 25
Recent developments in average hours worked 22
A Average weekly hours 22
B Net additional desired hours 22
C Share of part-time employment: actual and
demographic contribution 22
D Average weekly leave 23
4 Costs and prices 26
4.1 Bank staff’s projection for near-term CPI inflation 26
4.2 Contributions to CPI inflation 27
4.3 CPI inflation and measures of core CPI inflation 27
4.4 Sterling oil prices and contribution of fuels to
CPI inflation 28
4.5 Sterling wholesale gas prices 28
4.6 UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel 29
4.7 Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI) 29
4.8 Measures of unit labour costs 29
4.9 Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy
unit labour cost growth 30
4.10 Broad money and nominal GDP 31
5 Prospects for inflation 32
5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 33
5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 33
5.3 CPI inflation projection in November based on
market interest rate expectations and £375 billion
purchased assets 33
5.4 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in 2018 Q1
(central 90% of the distribution) 34
5.5 World GDP (UK-weighted) 34
5.6 Productivity 39
5.7 Unit labour costs 39
5.8 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in 2018 Q1
(central 90% of the distribution) 40
5.9 Unemployment projection based on market interest
rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 40
5.10 Inflation probabilities relative to the target 41
5.11 GDP projection based on constant nominal interest
rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased assets 41
5.12 CPI inflation projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased
assets 41
Other forecasters’ expectations 42
A Forecasters’ central projections of GDP growth 42
B Average probability of above-target CPI inflation 42
C Distribution of central expectations for the stock of
asset purchases 42
44 Inflation Report February 2016
Tables
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 1
1.B Inflation rates in selected countries and regions 6
1.C GDP in selected countries and regions 8
2 Demand and output 10
2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 10
2.B Expenditure components of demand 12
2.C Net finance raised by PNFCs 16
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 19
3.B Employment growth, vacancies and survey indicators
of employment intentions 21
3.C Indicators of wage growth 25
4 Costs and prices 26
4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 26
4.B Measures of unit labour costs 30
4.C Indicators of inflation expectations 31
5 Prospects for inflation 32
5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by
forward market interest rates 32
5.B Forecast summary 32
5.C Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements 35
5.D MPC key judgements 36
5.E Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s
modal projections 37
5.F Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal,
median and mean paths 39
5.G Q4 CPI inflation 40
Other forecasters’ expectations 42
1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections 42
 Glossary and other information 45
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices
index.
DGI – domestically generated inflation.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
M4 – UK non-bank, non-building society private sector’s
holdings of sterling notes and coin, and their sterling deposits
(including certificates of deposit, holdings of commercial
paper and other short-term instruments and claims arising
from repos) held at UK banks and building societies.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
RPI – retail prices index.
RPI inflation – inflation measured by the retail prices index.
Abbreviations
BCC – British Chambers of Commerce.
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CEIC – CEIC Data Company Ltd.
CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
EC – European Commission.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EME – emerging market economy.
EU – European Union.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FPC – Financial Policy Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
IIF – Institute of International Finance.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MSCI – Morgan Stanley Capital International Inc.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
OPEC – Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
PNFCs – private non-financial corporations.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
PwC – PricewaterhouseCoopers.
R&D – research and development.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
RICS – Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SMEs – small and medium-sized enterprises.
VAT – Value Added Tax.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Symbols and conventions
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in
charts and tables is the Bank of England or the Office for
National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from financial
markets data, are seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may
sometimes differ from the total shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first
observation within the relevant period, eg data for the first
quarter of the year.
Glossary and other information
© Bank of England 2016
ISSN 1353-6737
Printed by Park Communications Limited