Inflation Report
November 2016

BANK OF ENGLAND
Inflation Report
November 2016
In order to maintain price stability, the Government has set the Bank’s Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) a target for the annual inflation rate of the Consumer Prices Index of 2%.
Subject to that, the MPC is also required to support the Government’s economic policy,
including its objectives for growth and employment.
The Inflation Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of
the Monetary Policy Committee. It serves two purposes. First, its preparation provides a
comprehensive and forward-looking framework for discussion among MPC members as an aid
to our decision-making. Second, its publication allows us to share our thinking and explain the
reasons for our decisions to those whom they affect.
Although not every member will agree with every assumption on which our projections are
based, the fan charts represent the MPC’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths
for inflation, output and unemployment, as well as the uncertainties surrounding those central
projections.
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998.
The Monetary Policy Committee:
Mark Carney, Governor
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy
Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability
Nemat Shafik, Deputy Governor responsible for markets and banking
Kristin Forbes
Andrew Haldane
Ian McCafferty
Michael Saunders
Gertjan Vlieghe
The Inflation Report is available in PDF alongside PowerPoint‰ versions of the charts and
Excel spreadsheets of the data underlying most of them at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/2016/nov.aspx.

 Monetary Policy Summary i
1 Financial markets and global economic developments 1
1.1 Monetary policy developments 1
1.2 Developments in financial markets 4
1.3 Developments in global activity 7
1.4 Commodity markets and developments in inflation 10
Box Developments in UK financial conditions since the August Report 2
Box Monetary policy since the August Report 5
Box Explaining the long-term decline in interest rates 8
2 Demand and output 12
2.1 Domestic demand 13
2.2 Net trade and the current account 20
Box Defined-benefit pension fund deficits and the real economy 14
Box The housing market and household spending 18
Box Net trade and the exchange rate 21
3 Supply and the labour market 23
3.1 Labour demand 23
3.2 Slack in the economy 24
3.3 Labour supply 25
3.4 Productivity 26
4 Costs and prices 28
4.1 Consumer price developments and the near-term outlook 28
4.2 Imported cost pressures 29
4.3 Domestic cost pressures and companies’ margins 30
4.4 Inflation expectations 33
5 Prospects for inflation 34
5.1 The MPC’s key judgements and risks 37
5.2 The projections for demand, unemployment and inflation 43
Box Other forecasters’ expectations 45
Index of charts and tables 46
Glossary and other information 48
Contents

 Monetary Policy Summary i
Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet the
2% inflation target, and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its
meeting ending on 2 November 2016 the Committee voted unanimously to maintain
Bank Rate at 0.25%. The Committee voted unanimously to continue with the programme of
sterling non-financial investment-grade corporate bond purchases totalling up to £10 billion,
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves. The Committee also voted unanimously to
continue with the programme of £60 billion of UK government bond purchases to take the
total stock of these purchases to £435 billion, financed by the issuance of central bank
reserves.
At the time of the August Inflation Report, the Committee announced a package of supportive measures that it judged
was appropriate to balance the trade-off that had emerged in the economic outlook. On the one hand, economic
activity was expected to weaken and unemployment to rise, given the period of uncertainty likely to follow the
referendum on EU membership. On the other hand, inflation was expected to rise to a rate above the 2% target, for an
extended period, as a result of the depreciation of sterling that had accompanied the referendum result. At the August
meeting, a majority of Committee members also expected to support a further cut in Bank Rate at one of the remaining
MPC meetings of 2016 if the outlook remained broadly consistent with the one set out in the August Report.
In the three months since then, indicators of activity and business sentiment have recovered from their lows immediately
following the referendum and the preliminary estimate of GDP growth in Q3 was above expectations. These data
suggest that the near-term outlook for activity is stronger than expected three months ago. Household spending
appears to have grown at a somewhat faster pace than projected in August, and the housing market has been more
resilient than expected. By contrast, investment intentions have continued to soften and the commercial property
market has been subdued.
In financial markets, the past three months have been characterised by two phases. In the first, the sterling exchange
rate stabilised for a period following its initial post-referendum depreciation. Supported by the measures announced by
the MPC in August and more positive activity indicators, financial conditions and other asset prices recovered from the
deterioration seen straight after the referendum, accompanied by a sharp increase in corporate bond issuance. However,
in the period since the beginning of October, the sterling effective exchange rate index has depreciated further.
Market intelligence attributes these latter movements to perceptions that the United Kingdom’s future trading
arrangements with the EU might be less open than previously anticipated, requiring a lower real exchange rate to
improve competitiveness and support activity. Longer-term gilt yields have risen notably, as have market-implied
expectations of medium-term inflation.
The Committee’s latest projections for output, unemployment and inflation, conditioned on average market yields, are
set out in the November Inflation Report. Output growth is expected to be stronger in the near term but weaker than
previously anticipated in the latter part of the forecast period. In part that reflects the impact of lower real income
growth on household spending. It also reflects uncertainty over future trading arrangements, and the risk that UK-based
firms’ access to EU markets could be materially reduced, which could restrain business activity and supply growth over a
protracted period. The unemployment rate is projected to rise to around 5½% by the middle of 2018 and to stay at
around that level throughout 2019.
ii Inflation Report November 2016
Largely as a result of the depreciation of sterling, CPI inflation is expected to be higher throughout the three-year
forecast period than in the Committee’s August projections. In the central projection, inflation rises from its current level
of 1% to around 2¾% in 2018, before falling back gradually over 2019 to reach 2½% in three years’ time. Inflation is
judged likely to return to close to the target over the following year.
The MPC’s Remit requires that monetary policy should balance the speed with which inflation is returned to the target
with the support for real activity. Developments since August, in particular the direct impact of the further depreciation
of sterling on CPI inflation, have adversely affected that trade-off. This impact will ultimately prove temporary, and
attempting to offset it fully with tighter monetary policy would be excessively costly in terms of foregone output and
employment growth. However, there are limits to the extent to which above-target inflation can be tolerated.
Those limits depend, for example, on the cause of the inflation overshoot, the extent of second-round effects on inflation
expectations and domestic costs, and the scale of the shortfall in economic activity below potential. In the MPC’s
November forecast, the inflation overshoot is the product of a perceived shock to future supply, which has caused the
exchange rate to fall, alongside a modest projected shortfall of activity. Inflation expectations have picked up to around
their past average levels and domestic costs have remained contained. Given the projected rise in unemployment,
together with the risks around activity and inflation, and the potential for further volatility in asset prices, the MPC
judges it appropriate to accommodate a period of above-target inflation. That notwithstanding, the MPC is monitoring
closely the evolution of inflation expectations.
In light of these developments, and in keeping with its Remit, the MPC at its November meeting agreed unanimously
that Bank Rate should be maintained at its current level. It also agreed unanimously that it remained appropriate to
continue the previously announced asset purchase programmes, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
Earlier in the year, the MPC noted that the path of monetary policy following the referendum on EU membership would
depend on the evolution of the prospects for demand, supply, the exchange rate, and therefore inflation. This remains
the case. Monetary policy can respond, in either direction, to changes to the economic outlook as they unfold to ensure
a sustainable return of inflation to the 2% target. 
In the United Kingdom, the MPC’s August policy package helped to lower interest rates and support
asset prices. Since the start of October, however, UK gilt yields have risen sharply and by more than
yields in other advanced economies, alongside a further depreciation in sterling. Global activity
growth slowed during the first half of the year, but this weakness is expected to be temporary and
growth will be supported by policy measures and financial conditions. Oil prices have risen, which
will push up headline inflation rates.
1 Financial markets and global
economic developments
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 1
Developments in UK asset prices and financial conditions since
August can be divided into two broad phases, as set out in the
box on pages 2–3. Initially, the main influence was the
announcement of the MPC’s policy package on 4 August
(Section 1.1), which lowered interest rates (Chart 1.1) and
boosted UK asset prices (Section 1.2). Since the beginning of
October, however, UK-focused asset prices have
underperformed international equivalents and some
borrowing costs have risen, alongside a significant further
depreciation in sterling (Chart 1.2). Market contacts suggest
those moves were associated with increased perceptions that
the United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements with the
European Union might be less open than previously thought
likely.
Although global activity growth slowed somewhat in Q2,
the near-term outlook is for global growth to strengthen a
little, to a similar rate as projected three months ago
(Section 1.3). The large falls in oil prices during 2014–15
had been weighing on headline inflation rates, but those
effects have started to wane (Section 1.4). The rise in oil
prices since the August Report will further support headline
inflation rates.
1.1 Monetary policy developments
As explained in the box on pages 2–3, at its August meeting
the MPC voted to implement a package of policy measures
designed to support the domestic economy. The various
elements of this package are expected to operate through a
number of channels, including by boosting sterling asset prices
and lowering the cost of finance for UK companies
(Section 1.2). The MPC voted to make no changes to this
package at its September meeting, as set out in the box on
page 5. The details of the November decision are contained in
the Monetary Policy Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and
in more detail in the Minutes of the meeting.
Per cent
Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2016
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
+
–
(c) (e)
(d)
August
 Report 30-year
2-year
10-year
(b)
Chart 1.1 Sterling gilt yields fell following the August
policy announcement, but have since risen
Spot yields on UK gilts at selected maturities(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon spot rates derived from government bond prices.
(b) UK referendum on EU membership on 23 June.
(c) ECB announcement on 8 September.
(d) Bank of Japan announcement on 21 September.
(e) FOMC announcement on 21 September.
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
(a)
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
August Report
Sterling ERI
$/£
2014 15 16
€/£
Chart 1.2 Sterling has depreciated further since August
Sterling exchange rates
(a) UK referendum on EU membership on 23 June. 
2 Inflation Report November 2016
Developments in UK financial conditions since
the August Report
Since August, developments in UK asset prices and financial
conditions can be divided into two broad phases. Initially, the
main influence was the announcement of the MPC’s policy
package on 4 August. This supported UK asset prices and
lowered borrowing costs. Since the beginning of October,
however, UK-focused asset prices have underperformed their
equivalents internationally and some borrowing costs have
risen, alongside a significant further depreciation in sterling.
This box discusses the effect of these influences on UK asset
markets and financial conditions in more detail.
Developments in August and September
On 4 August, and as discussed in the box on pages iii–viii of
the August Report, the MPC announced a package of measures
to support the UK economy, consisting of:
• A 25 basis point cut in Bank Rate to 0.25%.
• A Term Funding Scheme (TFS) to reinforce the pass-through
of the cut in Bank Rate, financed by the issuance of central
bank reserves.
• Purchases of a stock of up to £10 billion of sterling
non-financial investment-grade corporate bonds, issued by
firms making a material contribution to the UK economy,
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
• An increase in the stock of purchased UK government bonds,
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, by
£60 billion, to £435 billion.
The MPC also noted that, if the incoming data proved broadly
consistent with the August Inflation Report projections, a
majority of members expected to support a further cut in
Bank Rate to its effective lower bound during the course of
2016.
The various elements of this package were expected to boost
sterling asset prices and lower the cost of finance for
UK companies. The initial response of financial markets was
consistent with this expectation and, if anything, the impact
was slightly greater than had been anticipated. The cut in
Bank Rate to 0.25% had already been priced into the short end
of the yield curve (Chart 1.3), but the market-implied path fell
over the whole three years of the MPC’s forecast period,
perhaps as market participants took a signal from the guidance
that Bank Rate was likely to be cut further before the end of
the year. Domestic government bond yields also fell and the
spreads on corporate bonds narrowed (Table 1). This lowered
the cost of issuing debt for companies with access to those
markets. In addition, equity prices rose by 1½%.
Funding costs for UK banks also decreased in August
(Section 1.2). One factor that may have contributed to the
narrowing in spreads is the TFS. By providing funding at close
to Bank Rate, with a penalty rate if banks reduce net lending,
the TFS may have reduced banks’ relative demand for other
sources of funding, which all else equal should reduce spreads
on that funding. In addition, the announcement of the
Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme (CBPS) may have helped to
reduce bank funding spreads. Although bank bonds are not
eligible for the scheme, by reducing yields on the bonds of
non-financial companies the CBPS may have indirectly
increased the demand for, and reduced the yields on, bank
bonds.
Throughout the rest of August, yields remained lower and
many asset prices higher than before the August Report,
supporting domestic financial conditions. Indeed, there are
signs that these developments have already begun to affect
interest rates on bank lending to households and companies.
In the weeks preceding the MPC’s announcement,
market-implied interest rate expectations had fallen and those
households taking out a fixed-rate mortgage received lower
quotes as a result. For example, two-year fixed rates for new
mortgages at 75% or 90% loan to value fell by around
20 basis points between May and July (Table 2). Since then,
the rates on fixed-rate products have fallen further and many
households with floating-rate mortgages have seen a cut to
their mortgage rates as well. Companies have also started to
benefit from lower interest rates: banks responding to the
2016 Q3 Credit Conditions Survey reported that lower
wholesale funding costs were being passed through to
companies, with rates on corporate lending consequently
falling.
Table 1 Yields fell in August, before rising in October
Financial market indicators
 Cumulative change
 Level between 3 August and:
 26 Oct. 4 Aug. 30 Sep. 26 Oct.
UK ten-year gilt yield (per cent) 1.20 -17 -11 29 bp
Sterling investment-grade corporate
bond spreads(a) (basis points) 127 -10 -17 -11 bp
Sterling high-yield corporate
bond spreads(a) (basis points) 494 -8 -20 -54 bp
FTSE All-Share (index) 3774 1.5 4.2 4.7%
UK-focused companies’ equity
prices(b) (index: 3 Aug. 2016 = 100) 100.5 0.9 2.2 0.5%
Five-year, five-year forward inflation
compensation(c) (per cent) 3.53 0 32 55 bp
Sterling ERI (January 2005 = 100) 74.5 -1.3 -2.9 -6.6%
Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch Global Research, Bank of England, Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Non-financial companies. Option-adjusted spreads to government bond yields.
(b) As defined in footnote (a) of Chart 1.8.
(c) From inflation swaps.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 3
Developments in October
During October some of the improvement in financial
conditions that had taken place during August unwound.
Around the beginning of the month, UK yields began to rise
(Chart 1.1). Some of that occurred alongside rises in interest
rates internationally (Chart 1.4) suggesting that global factors
were a driver. The increases in UK benchmark yields were,
however, somewhat larger and coincided with a further
marked depreciation in sterling (Table 1). In the run-up to the
November Report sterling was 6½% lower than at the time of
the August Report. Market contacts largely attribute those
moves to changes in perceptions of the United Kingdom’s
future trading arrangements (Section 1.2).
Alongside the depreciation in sterling and the rise in
benchmark yields, inflation compensation increased
(Section 1.2). For example, compensation for UK RPI inflation
five to ten years ahead derived from inflation swaps has risen
by a little over 50 basis points since August (Table 1).
The cost for some companies of issuing debt in capital markets
also rose slightly over this period: spreads on corporate bonds
issued by less-risky companies — investment-grade bonds —
widened a little, and sterling corporate bonds more broadly
have underperformed relative to their US dollar and
euro-denominated equivalents (Section 1.2). While the overall
FTSE All-Share index rose somewhat, it will have been boosted
by the effect of the fall in sterling on the value of companies’
foreign income; domestically focused companies’ equity
prices fell (Table 1).
The overall impact of these more recent developments on
financial conditions will depend on the net effect of the moves
in the exchange rate and asset prices. The rises in yields, to
the extent that they persist, represent a tightening in financial
conditions and are likely to feed through to the interest rates
faced by households and companies. Set against that,
however, the depreciation in sterling will, all else equal,
support UK financial conditions by making sterling assets more
attractive to foreign investors.
Table 2 Retail interest rates have fallen since May
Retail deposit and lending interest rates(a)
 Level (per cent) Change (basis points)
 September Since May Since July
Households
Mortgages
Outstanding business(b)(c)
Floating 2.62 -24 -24
Fixed up to five years 2.79 -10 -5
New business(d)
Two-year fixed rate, 75% loan to value 1.59 -32 -13
Two-year fixed rate, 90% loan to value 2.42 -33 -15
Deposits(b)(c)
Outstanding sight deposits 0.62 -6 -7
New time deposits 1.02 -27 -22
Private non-financial corporations(b)
Outstanding floating loans 2.59 -16 -15
New floating loans 2.39 -12 -14
(a) The Bank’s quoted and effective interest rate series are currently compiled using data from up to
19 UK monetary financial institutions. Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Sterling-only average monthly effective rates.
(c) Interest rates on business with individuals and individual trusts.
(d) Sterling-only end-month quoted rates.
The European Central Bank (ECB) made no changes to policy
in September or October. Some market participants had
expected an extension of the ECB’s asset purchase scheme
beyond March 2017 to be announced at the September
meeting and, following the announcement, bond yields rose
slightly. But reports from market contacts suggest that most
still expect an announcement of further easing in monetary
policy in December.
On 21 September, the Bank of Japan announced a number of
changes to its policy framework after a review of its
‘quantitative and qualitative easing’ and negative interest rate
policies. These included a target for the yield on ten-year
government bonds, a removal of the maturity target for
purchased assets and a commitment to overshoot its 2%
inflation target. The changes aimed to help to prevent further
reductions in bank profitability, support lending and increase
inflation expectations. While the reaction of Japanese
government bond prices to these announcements was
subdued, the equity prices of Japanese banks rose on the
announcement. There had also been some rise in international
Per cent
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2013 14 15 16 17 18 19
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
Solid lines: November Report
Dashed lines: August Report
ECB deposit rate
ECB main
 refinancing rate
Federal funds rate(b)
Bank Rate
+
–
Chart 1.3 Market-implied paths for policy rates have
risen internationally
International forward interest rates(a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, European Central Bank (ECB) and Federal Reserve.
(a) The November 2016 and August 2016 curves are estimated using instantaneous forward
overnight index swap rates in the fifteen working days to 26 October and 27 July
respectively.
(b) Upper bound of the target range. 
4 Inflation Report November 2016
long-term interest rates in the run-up to the announcement,
some of which subsequently unwound (Chart 1.4).
In the United States, the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) voted to keep rates on hold in September, and US, UK
and euro-area yield curves flattened following the
announcement (Chart 1.4). Subsequently, however, the
implied path for the federal funds rate steepened, and in the
run-up to the November Report was around 15 basis points
higher than in August (Chart 1.3).
1.2 Developments in financial markets
Exchange rates
At the time of the August Report, sterling had depreciated by
15% relative to its November 2015 peak. In the fifteen
working days to 26 October it had depreciated by a further
6½% (Chart 1.2). The bulk of the decline in sterling occurred
from the beginning of October, which market contacts largely
attributed to changes in perceptions of the United Kingdom’s
future trading arrangements. In the weeks leading up to the
November Report, sterling implied volatility from options
prices had also picked up, perhaps reflecting increases in
investors’ uncertainty around the future value of sterling,
although it remained below its level at the time of the
referendum.
Interest rates
The market-implied path for Bank Rate fell slightly after the
MPC’s August announcement (see the box on pages 2–3).
Although the 25 basis point cut in Bank Rate had been largely
expected by market participants, they may have taken a signal
from the guidance that, should the incoming data be
consistent with the August Report forecast, a majority of
MPC members expected to support a further cut in Bank Rate
to its effective lower bound during the course of 2016.
Longer-term gilt yields also fell (Chart 1.1). Given the size of
the gilt purchases announced, that fall was broadly in line with
previous announcements of asset purchases, particularly the
first round of purchases during 2009.(1)
Following those initial falls, UK yields subsequently rose from
the beginning of October and, in the run-up to the November
Report, both the market-implied path for Bank Rate
(Chart 1.3) and longer-term gilt yields (Chart 1.1) were higher
than at the time of the August Report. Some of that rise
occurred alongside rises in long-term interest rates
internationally (Chart 1.4), suggesting that global factors were
a driver. UK yields, however, have risen by more than those in
the United States and euro area, possibly for similar reasons
that drove the fall in the sterling ERI.
Per cent
Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2016
United States
Euro area(e)
United Kingdom
0
1
2
3
4
August Report (b)
(c)
(d)
Chart 1.4 Longer-term yields are above their August levels
Five-year, five-year forward nominal interest rates(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon forward rates derived from government bond prices.
(b) ECB announcement on 8 September.
(c) Bank of Japan announcement on 21 September.
(d) FOMC announcement on 21 September.
(e) An estimate based on French and German government bond prices.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
United Kingdom
United States
Euro area
Dashed lines: averages since 2005
Chart 1.5 Inflation compensation has picked up sharply
in the United Kingdom since August
Five-year, five-year forward inflation compensation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) UK and euro-area series are derived from interest rate swaps. US series is derived from
nominal and inflation-protected Treasury bonds. The instruments used are linked to the
UK RPI, US CPI and euro-area HICP measures of inflation respectively.
(1) For more detail on the impact of the August announcement see Haldane, A G,
Roberts-Sklar, M, Wieladek, T and Young, C (2016), ‘QE: the story so far’, Bank of
England Staff Working Paper No. 624; www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/
Documents/workingpapers/2016/swp624.pdf.
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
Percentage points
2015 16
August Report
Percentage points
High-yield (US$) (right-hand scale)
High-yield (£) (right-hand scale)
High-yield (€) (right-hand scale) Investment-grade (€) (left-hand scale)
Investment-grade (US$) (left-hand scale)
Investment-grade (£) (left-hand scale)
Chart 1.6 Sterling corporate bond spreads narrowed after
the CBPS was announced
Non-financial corporate bond spreads(a)
Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch Global Research and Bank calculations.
(a) Option-adjusted spreads to government bond yields. Investment-grade bond yields are
calculated using an index of bonds with a rating of BBB3 or above. High-yield corporate
bond yields are calculated using aggregate indices of bonds rated lower than BBB3. Due to
monthly index rebalancing, movements in yields at the end of each month might reflect
changes in the population of securities within the indices.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 5
Monetary policy since the August Report
The MPC’s central projection in the August Report was that
four-quarter GDP growth would slow materially in the near
term, before settling below its historical average rate by the
end of the forecast period. This reflected a drag on private
domestic demand growth from uncertainty in the near term,
and a path for potential supply growth that was well below
past averages. CPI inflation was projected to pick up over the
next year, rising above the 2% target from 2018, as the
depreciation in sterling and the unwinding of the effects of the
past falls in energy and imported goods prices offset an
increased margin of spare capacity. That central projection
was conditioned on: the path for Bank Rate implied by
market interest rates; the announced Term Funding Scheme;
and the stock of purchased gilts and corporate bonds
reaching £435 billion and £10 billion respectively and
remaining there throughout the forecast period. The last
three elements would be financed by the issuance of central
bank reserves.
At its meeting ending on 14 September, the MPC continued
to expect a material slowing in UK GDP growth in the second
half of 2016, although survey indicators suggested somewhat
less of a slowing than anticipated in the August Report. The
announcement of the MPC’s policy package in August had
led to an increase in UK asset prices and falls in market
interest rates. In addition, many banks had announced cuts in
both variable and fixed-rate mortgage products and deposit
rates.
Twelve-month CPI inflation had remained at 0.6% in August,
lower than projected at the time of the August Report, and
well below the 2% inflation target. Despite the lower starting
point, CPI inflation was still expected to rise to around the
2% target in the first half of 2017, as the influence of past falls
in energy and food prices waned.
All Committee members judged it appropriate to leave the
stance of monetary policy unchanged. Although news on the
near-term momentum of the UK economy had been slightly
to the upside, the MPC’s view of the contours of the economic
outlook following the EU referendum had not changed. If the
outlook in November was judged to be broadly consistent
with the August Report projections, a majority of members
expected to support a further cut in Bank Rate to its effective
lower bound at one of the MPC’s forthcoming meetings during
the course of 2016.
Changes in nominal government bond yields can reflect
changes in both real interest rates and inflation compensation.
Compensation for inflation five to ten years ahead in the
United States and euro area has fallen markedly over the past
two years and, although they have risen slightly since August,
they remain well below their historical average levels
(Chart 1.5). The UK measure — which is related to RPI
inflation — has recovered its fall over the past year and is
around past average levels. In part, this may reflect increases
in inflation expectations or increased perceptions of risks
around future inflation. In addition, these measures may also
be influenced by other factors. For example, fluctuations in
demand from certain investors — such as pension funds and
insurers — for hedging the risks associated with liabilities that
are linked to future inflation rates can have a material impact
on these measures. Market contacts suggest that demand
from those investors has been particularly strong in recent
months, having been more subdued around the time of the
referendum.
Notwithstanding the recent increases in yields, longer-term
interest rates across advanced economies remain lower than
at the start of the year (Chart 1.4), continuing their long-term
decline. As discussed in the box on pages 8–9, while monetary
policy may have played some role in the recent decline, the
longer-term decline in interest rates across many countries is
likely to reflect mainly global structural factors such as
increases in desired saving and greater risk aversion.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
Indices: 2 January 2015 = 100
S&P 500
 (right-hand scale)
FTSE All-Share
 (right-hand scale)
Euro Stoxx
 (right-hand scale)
MSCI Emerging Markets
 (right-hand scale)
Shanghai Composite
 (left-hand scale)
2015
Index: 2 January 2015 = 100
August Report
16
Chart 1.7 Equity prices have risen
International equity prices(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) In local currency terms, except for MSCI Emerging Markets, which is in US dollar terms. 
6 Inflation Report November 2016
Corporate capital markets
Although benchmark interest rates have risen slightly since
August, the cost of finance for UK non-financial companies is
broadly unchanged. The spread between the yield on sterling
bonds issued by lower-risk companies — known as
investment-grade bonds — and equivalent government
bond yields narrowed significantly after the MPC’s
announcement of the Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme
(CBPS) (Chart 1.6). In contrast, the spreads on US dollar and
euro-denominated bonds were little changed. Although
sterling investment-grade spreads widened slightly alongside
the depreciation in sterling in October, they remain narrower
than at the time of the August Report. All else equal, these
narrower spreads will have reduced the cost of issuing
sterling-denominated bonds and supported issuance, which
has picked up sharply since the MPC’s announcement
(Section 2).
Spreads on sterling-denominated debt issued by riskier
borrowers — known as high-yield bonds — narrowed to a
similar degree to those issued by less risky borrowers
following the announcement of the CBPS (Chart 1.6). They
subsequently narrowed further, in line with spreads on
dollar and euro-denominated bonds, perhaps reflecting a
gradual reduction in investors’ perceptions of risk
internationally. During October, however, sterling high-yield
corporate bonds underperformed relative to their US dollar
and euro-denominated equivalents.
UK equity prices have increased since August. The FTSE
All-Share index rose by around 1½% on the announcement
of the MPC’s policy package and, in the run-up to the
November Report, was around 5% higher than at the time of
the August Report (Chart 1.7). The FTSE All-Share index has
outperformed the equity prices of UK-focused companies
since June. That probably reflects the boost to the profits of
internationally focused companies from the recent
depreciation of sterling. Over the past year, changes in the
equity prices of these internationally focused companies
relative to those of domestically focused companies have been
closely correlated with changes in the sterling exchange rate
(Chart 1.8). Improved global sentiment may have also
boosted the prospects of those internationally focused
companies: equity prices in the euro area, Japan and emerging
market economies (EMEs) were also slightly higher at the time
of the November Report than three months ago (Chart 1.7).
Bank funding costs
Banks can raise funds either through issuing debt or equity.
Although UK bank equity prices remain lower than before the
EU referendum, the cost of wholesale debt funding has fallen
due, in part, to a narrowing in funding spreads (Chart 1.9). As
explained in the box on pages 2–3, the TFS and CBPS may
have contributed to that narrowing in spreads. Recent actions
by the Financial Policy Committee to lower the countercyclical
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Indices: 23 June 2016 = 100
2014 15 16
Sterling ERI, inverted
Performance of FTSE All-Share index
 relative to the equity prices of
 UK domestically focused companies(a)
August Report
Chart 1.8 The FTSE All-Share index has been supported
by the depreciation in sterling
The FTSE All-Share index relative to the equity prices of
UK domestically focused companies and the sterling ERI
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Ratio of FTSE All-Share index and an index of UK domestically focused companies’ equity
prices. UK domestically focused companies are defined as those generating at least 70% of
their revenues in the United Kingdom.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2011 12 13 14 15 16
Percentage points
Senior unsecured
 bond spread(a)
Spread on fixed-rate
 retail bonds(b)
Five-year CDS premia(c)
Covered bond
 spread(d)
August Report
+
–
Chart 1.9 Bank funding spreads have narrowed
UK banks’ indicative longer-term funding spreads
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, IHS Markit and Bank calculations.
(a) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to mid-swaps for the
major UK lenders’ five-year euro-denominated senior unsecured bonds or a suitable proxy
when unavailable.
(b) Unweighted average of spreads for two-year and three-year sterling fixed-rate retail bonds
over equivalent-maturity swaps. Bond rates are end-month rates and swap rates are
monthly averages of daily rates.
(c) Unweighted average of five-year euro-denominated senior CDS premia for the major
UK lenders.
(d) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to swaps for the major
UK lenders’ five-year euro-denominated covered bonds or a suitable proxy when unavailable.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 7
capital buffer and to exclude central bank reserves from the
leverage ratio should also, all else equal, help banks to
structure their balance sheets to mitigate upward pressure on
overall funding costs.
1.3 Developments in global activity
Four-quarter UK-weighted global activity growth slowed in
2016 Q2 to 1.9%, somewhat weaker than projected three
months ago and still subdued relative to its pre-crisis average
rate of 3% (Table 1.A). This was due in part to slower growth
in the United States and EMEs; indicators of activity growth in
Q3, however, suggest that this weakness was temporary.
Growth is therefore projected to pick up gradually to a similar
rate to that projected three months ago. As in recent Reports,
the risks around the projection for global growth are judged to
lie to the downside, largely on account of continued
vulnerabilities in EMEs (Section 5).
Euro area
Having recovered from its weakness in 2013, four-quarter
euro-area GDP growth has been steady over the past two
years, supported by monetary policy and a slightly
expansionary fiscal stance. Quarterly growth in Q3 remained
at 0.3%, as projected in the August Report.
The near-term outlook for euro-area activity is for growth to
pick up slightly around the turn of the year, a little faster than
projected three months ago. Measures of uncertainty in the
euro area, which had risen around the time of the
EU referendum, have since fallen back (Table 1.B). Indicators
of business activity and confidence have strengthened slightly,
although some remain subdued relative to their pre-crisis
levels. In contrast, consumer confidence has eased back a
little since June, although it remains around its past average
level.
United States
Over the past few years the US economy has continued to
expand at a modest rate, driven by household consumption
growth (Chart 1.10). Quarterly activity growth recovered to
0.7% in Q3, from a temporary dip in Q2 as the drag from
stockbuilding unwound. Business investment growth remains
weak, however, in part reflecting the effect of lower oil prices
on energy-related investment. In the near term, activity is
projected to continue growing at a little above ½% per
quarter, supported by a gradual increase in productivity
growth, albeit to rates below its pre-crisis average.
Employment growth, despite some volatility, appears to have
been resilient. Monthly non-farm payrolls increased by
192,000 on average in Q3, slightly above the level consistent
with a stable unemployment rate. An increase in participation,
however, led to a small increase in the unemployment rate to
5.0%. This is only slightly above the median projection of
Table 1.A Global activity growth slowed a little in Q2
GDP in selected countries and regions(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier, annualised
 Averages 2016
 1998– 2012– 2014 2015 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3
 2007 13 H1 H2
United Kingdom 2.9 1.9 3.5 1.5 1.9 1.7 2.7 2.0
Euro area (38%) 2.3 -0.2 1.3 2.3 1.6 2.1 1.2 1.4
United States (20%) 3.0 2.0 2.5 2.3 1.4 0.8 1.4 2.9
China (3%)(b) 10.0 7.8 7.3 7.0 6.9 6.7 6.7 6.7
Japan (2%) 1.1 1.1 -0.8 1.5 0.2 2.1 0.7 n.a.
India (1%)(b) n.a. 6.2 7.0 7.1 7.4 7.9 7.1 n.a.
Russia (1%)(c) 7.8 1.6 -0.7 -4.9 -2.3 n.a. n.a. n.a.
Brazil (1%) 3.1 2.6 -0.6 -6.3 -5.5 -1.7 -2.3 n.a.
UK-weighted world GDP(d) 3.0 1.6 2.2 2.3 2.0 2.0 1.6 n.a.
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), OECD, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) Real GDP measures. Figures in parentheses are shares in UK goods and services exports in 2015.
(b) Data are four-quarter growth. The earliest observation for India is 2012 Q2.
(c) The earliest observation for Russia is 2003 Q2. Figure for 2015 H2 is based on data to 2015 Q3. Official
seasonally adjusted GDP data beyond 2015 Q3 are not yet available.
(d) Constructed using data for real GDP growth rates for 180 countries weighted according to their shares in
UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the latest observation is 2016 Q2. For those countries where
data are not yet available, Bank staff projections are used.
Table 1.B Euro-area activity growth remained steady in Q3
Selected euro-area indicators
Differences from averages, 1998–2007 (number of standard deviations)
 Quarterly averages
 2016
 2013 2014 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3 Oct.
Policy uncertainty(a) 2.0 1.0 1.5 2.7 3.2 2.5 n.a.
Consumer confidence(b) -1.8 -0.3 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1
Business confidence(c) -1.6 -0.7 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2 0.0
Composite PMI: output(d) -1.4 -0.5 -0.2 -0.4 -0.4 -0.5 -0.3
Composite PMI: new orders(d) -1.3 -0.5 -0.1 -0.2 -0.3 -0.3 -0.1
Sources: European Commission, IHS Markit, policyuncertainty.com and Thomson Reuters Datastream.
(a) Policy uncertainty is a measure of media citations of terms related to policy uncertainty, based on
Baker, S R, Bloom, N and Davis, S J (2016), ‘Measuring economic policy uncertainty’, NBER Working Paper
No. 21633. Measure constructed as an average of the series for France, Germany, Italy and Spain. Series for
Spain begins in 2001.
(b) Overall EC consumer confidence indicator for the euro area.
(c) Headline sentiment index, reweighted to exclude consumer confidence. Average of overall confidence in
the industrial (50%), services (38%), retail trade (6%) and construction sectors (6%).
(d) Data for October are flash estimates. The eurozone PMI is produced by IHS Markit based on original survey
data collected from a representative panel of around 5,000 companies based in the euro-area
manufacturing and service sectors. National manufacturing data are included for Austria, France, Germany,
Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, the Republic of Ireland and Spain. National services data are included for
France, Germany, Italy, the Republic of Ireland and Spain. Earliest observation is for July 1998.
8 Inflation Report November 2016
Explaining the long-term decline in
interest rates
Both short-term and longer-term interest rates have fallen
across advanced economies. Some of the recent declines,
particularly in short-term interest rates, are likely to reflect
cyclical factors with many economies having experienced
similar shocks and policy responses during and after the
financial crisis. Longer-term interest rates have, however,
been declining globally for several decades (Chart A),
suggesting that global structural factors — such as
demographics and increased risk aversion — are likely to have
been the primary driver. To the extent that monetary policy
makers have set policy rates at low levels, this is likely to be a
consequence of these trends, rather than being the primary
cause of low rates: had central banks failed to track this trend,
policy would have been too tight and inflation and output too
low.(1)
While the transition from a higher inflation environment to
lower, more stable, inflation in many advanced economies will
have contributed to some of the decline in nominal interest
rates since the 1980s, measures of real interest rates, which
account for this, have also declined significantly over that
period. Given the highly integrated nature of global capital
markets, a key factor behind this decline is likely to have been
shifts in global saving and investment preferences. This box
examines the evidence for such shifts in more detail.
What influences long-term real interest rates?
Longer-term real interest rates will be determined by the
balance between saving and investment preferences. For
example, an increase in desired saving for a given desire to
invest will lower the real interest rate required to bring actual
saving and investment into line.
The decline in global real interest rates since the 1980s has
been accompanied by broadly stable actual investment (and
saving) relative to GDP. If the fall in real interest rates had
been driven only by an increase in desired saving, the amount
of actual saving and investment would have been expected to
increase (moving from point A to point B in Chart B). The
relative stability of the actual investment share therefore
suggests that desired investment has also fallen (moving from
B to C in Chart B). Together changes in desired saving and
investment may be able to explain some of the falls in real
interest rates since the 1980s. But estimates of the effects of
these are extremely uncertain: desired saving and investment
are unobservable, as are their relationships with real interest
rates.
Global growth expectations
In classical theories of growth, household saving decisions,
wealth and the real interest rate are closely, and positively,
related to the rate of technological progress, or productivity.
Global growth expectations were broadly stable until the
financial crisis, however, so this factor is unlikely to explain
much of the decline in real interest rates observed before then.
Downward revisions to global growth expectations since the
financial crisis, however, could account for some of the more
recent fall in long-term interest rates. For example, Consensus
forecasts for global growth in five to ten years’ time have
fallen by around 1 percentage point since 2007.
Other shifts in desired global saving
In addition to changes in expected future economic growth,
other factors may have increased desired global saving, which
would be reflected in the blue line in Chart B moving
outwards and lowering the real interest rate (from point A
to B). One such factor is the changing global demographic
(1) For more detail on this, see Broadbent, B (2014), ‘Monetary policy, asset prices and
distribution’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/
speech770.pdf; and Carney, M (2013), ‘The spirit of the season’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech696.pdf.
Global saving and investment as a proportion of global GDP
Increase in
 desired saving
Decrease
 in desired
 investment A
B
C
Saving
 schedule
Investment
 schedule
Global real interest rate
Chart B Higher desired saving and lower desired
investment push down interest rates
Shifts in desired saving and investment: an illustration
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
1992 95 98 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Per cent
United Kingdom
+
–
Chart A Forward interest rates have fallen across
advanced economies in recent decades
Five-year, five-year forward nominal interest rates(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Derived from the yields of five and ten-year benchmark government bonds. Green lines
show data for: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain and the United States.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 9
profile.(1) Net wealth typically increases over an individual’s
working lifetime: young people tend to have more debt than
older people, and over their working lives individuals tend to
accumulate wealth in order to finance their consumption in
retirement. Over the past few decades, the age distribution
has changed such that a greater proportion of the population
are at stages of life associated with higher rates of saving.
Further, as life expectancy has tended to increase relative to
average retirement ages, individuals may choose to save a
greater proportion of their income while they are working in
order to finance the same rate of consumption in their
retirement. These demographic effects are likely to have
increased aggregate desired wealth and pushed down real
interest rates.(2)(3)
Changes in the distribution of income and wealth within
countries may also have pushed up desired saving.(4) People’s
saving rates tend to increase with their incomes, so the rise in
income inequality since the 1980s — which has been
associated with a greater proportion of income going to those
in the higher income groups — may have pushed up aggregate
desired saving.(5)
Another driver of desired saving is likely to have been a rise in
EME government saving. During the Asian debt crisis in the
late 1990s, the sudden reversal of capital flows to emerging
economies prompted a sharp slowing in activity. Since then,
EME governments have increased their saving, in part as a
precautionary measure to avoid fluctuations in private sector
borrowing destabilising their economies, which will have
pushed down real interest rates. In recent years, however, the
saving of oil-exporting economies have fallen significantly,
which may have pushed up real interest rates.
Other shifts in desired global investment
At the same time as the rise in desired saving, desired
investment appears to have fallen, consistent with the
magenta line in Chart B moving inwards (from point B to
point C). That is likely to have reflected several factors. For
example, investors in risky projects require an expected rate of
return greater than the real interest rate on relatively safe
assets, such as government bonds, in order to compensate
them for the risk they may lose some of their initial
investment. While the cost of financing for companies has
fallen in recent decades across many countries, it has fallen by
less than yields on government bonds. That suggests that the
compensation that investors require for holding risky assets
has increased, perhaps reflecting increased risk aversion or
heightened perceptions of risk: for example, if investors
perceive that the probability of significant adverse events have
increased they may be more willing to pay more for, and
tolerate lower returns on, relatively safe government debt.(6)
This could have offset some of the boost to desired
investment that would otherwise have been provided by lower
real interest rates.
Another factor that will influence desired investment is the
price of capital goods, which has fallen significantly relative to
output prices since the 1980s. That means that it costs
businesses less, as a share of their revenue, to fund a given
investment project. The lower price of capital may have
encouraged some companies to undertake more investment,
which would increase the overall capital stock. As the stock of
capital increases, the extra productive potential of increasing it
further is likely to decline. If this effect is sufficiently large,
then the real interest rate would be expected to fall.(7)
Other trends are also likely to have affected desired
investment. For example, public sector investment rates have
been declining over the past few decades. To the extent that
those projects are not otherwise funded by the private sector,
this would weigh on aggregate desired investment. And there
have been some signs of a shift in corporate behaviour
towards a greater distribution of earnings to investors instead
of using these funds for investment, which may be due to the
changing nature of incentives such as those associated with a
reduction in the time shares tend to be held for.(8)
Conclusion
The impact of shifts in desired saving and investment on
global real interest rates could explain much of the fall in real
long-term interest rates in recent decades. But the relative
sizes of the effects of these factors are highly uncertain, as is
the outlook for real interest rates, which will depend on the
extent to which these structural shifts persist.
(1) For a more detailed discussion of how demographics can influence interest rates,
see Vlieghe, G (2016), ‘Debt, demographics and the distribution of income:
new challenges for monetary policy’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/speeches/2016/speech872.pdf.
(2) For a model of how variations in net wealth over the life cycle can affect real interest
rates, see Eggertsson, G and Mehrotra, N (2014), ‘A model of secular stagnation’,
NBER Working Paper No. 20574.
(3) For a model of how increasing life expectancy can push down on real interest rates,
see Carvalho, C, Ferrero, A and Necchio, F (2015), ‘Demographics and real rates:
inspecting the mechanism’, working paper, Oxford University.
(4) See, for example, the discussion of inequality in Rachel, L and Smith, T D (2015),
‘Secular drivers of the global real interest rate’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper
No. 571; www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2015/
swp571.pdf.
(5) See, for example, Attanasio, O, Besley, T, Haldane, A, Lindert, P, Piketty, T,
Shanbhogue, R and Ventura, J (2015), ‘Capital in the 21st century’, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 55, No. 1, pages 36–46; www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2015/q103.pdf.
(6) For a discussion of this, see Broadbent, B (2014), ‘Monetary policy, asset prices and
distribution’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/
speech770.pdf.
(7) Thwaites, G (2015), ‘Why are real interest rates so low? Secular stagnation and the
relative price of investment goods’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 564;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2015/swp564.pdf.
(8) For more detail on the conflicting incentives faced by companies, see Haldane, A
(2015), ‘Who owns a company?’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/speeches/2015/speech833.pdf. 
10 Inflation Report November 2016
FOMC members for the longer-run unemployment rate of
4.8%. While broader measures of underemployment — which
include those who would like to work more hours for example,
or those marginally attached to the labour force — remain
elevated relative to their pre-crisis levels, most measures
suggest that slack has narrowed over the past couple of years.
Perhaps reflecting this, measures of wage growth have shown
tentative signs of picking up: for example, the Employment
Cost Index measure of wages increased by 2.4% over the
four quarters to 2016 Q3, up from around 2% in 2014–15.
Emerging market economies
Over the past few years, four-quarter activity growth in China
has slowed gradually from around 10%. This slowing appears
to have stabilised in recent quarters, and growth in Q3 was
broadly in line with expectations at 6.7% (Table 1.A). At the
end of last year there had been concerns among market
participants of a more pronounced slowing in growth. Those
concerns appear to have diminished, at least in the near term;
capital outflow pressures have eased and the depreciation in
the renminbi exchange rate has been gradual. But activity
continues to be underpinned by strong domestic credit
growth, which poses a risk to the medium-term sustainability
of growth.
Elsewhere, EME activity growth slowed a little further. Growth
was weaker than expected in 2016 H1 as activity in Brazil
contracted by more than anticipated and growth in India
slowed slightly. Bank lending conditions also continued to
tighten (Chart 1.11). Some of the weakness in growth
reflected erratic factors and so is likely to dissipate. In
addition, the adverse effects of lower commodity prices
(Section 1.4) on commodity exporters is expected to diminish
following recent increases in oil prices. Moreover, portfolio
capital inflows to EMEs increased in Q3 and corporate bond
spreads have also narrowed in recent months. This may
suggest some improvement in financial conditions, which
should support near-term growth prospects. Consistent with
this, more recent data and forward-looking indicators suggest
some improvement in overall EME growth in Q3. In particular,
there are signs of stabilisation in Russia and Brazil, two
economies that accounted for a significant proportion of the
slowdown in overall EME growth during 2012–16.
As in August, the balance of risks to EME growth prospects
remains to the downside. Many EMEs have a large stock of
outstanding debt, and may be vulnerable to capital outflows
and any tightening in financial conditions, for example if
US interest rates rise more quickly than expected.
1.4 Commodity markets and developments
in inflation
Inflation across advanced economies remains weaker than
prior to the financial crisis (Table 1.C). Headline inflation
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16
Diffusion indices
Latin America
Emerging
 Europe
Emerging Asia
Africa and
 Middle East
All emerging economies
Chart 1.11 Financial conditions may have held back EME
growth recently
EME bank lending conditions(a)
Source: Institute of International Finance.
(a) A balance of 50 indicates neutral conditions, and a lower (higher) balance indicates tighter
(looser) conditions.
Table 1.C Inflation remains weak across countries
Inflation in selected countries and regions
Per cent
 Monthly averages
 1998– 2015 2015 2016 2016 2016
 2007 H1 H2 Q1 Q2 July Aug. Sep. Oct.
Annual headline consumer price inflation
United Kingdom 1.6 0.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.6 1.0 n.a.
Euro area(a) 2.0 -0.1 0.1 0.0 -0.1 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.5
United States(b) 2.0 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.0 0.8 1.0 1.2 n.a.
UK-weighted
world inflation(c) 2.0 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.6 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Annual consumer price inflation excluding food and energy(d)
United Kingdom 1.2 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 n.a.
Euro area(a) 1.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8
United States(b) 1.8 1.4 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.7 n.a.
Sources: Eurostat, IMF WEO, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and
Bank calculations.
(a) Data points for October 2016 are flash estimates.
(b) Personal consumption expenditure price index inflation. Data point for September 2016 is a preliminary
estimate.
(c) Constructed using data for consumption deflators for 51 countries weighted according to their shares in
UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the latest observation is 2016 Q2. Where data are not yet
available, Bank staff projections are used.
(d) For the euro area and the United Kingdom, excludes energy, food, alcoholic beverages and tobacco. For the
United States, excludes food and energy.
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Government
Change in inventories
Net exports
Personal consumption
Private investment
GDP growth (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 1.10 US GDP growth picked up in Q3
Contributions to quarterly US GDP growth(a)
Source: US Bureau of Economic Analysis.
(a) Chained-volume measures. Seasonally adjusted annualised rate.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 11
rates have been dragged down by falls in the prices of
energy-related goods following the fall in oil prices in 2014–15
(Chart 1.12). In addition, the prices of other commodities,
including agricultural products, have drifted lower over the
past two years.
As the effects of past falls in oil prices have begun to fade,
headline inflation rates have started to increase and will be
boosted further by the rise in oil prices since the start of the
year. Ultimately the price of oil is determined by the balance
between oil supply and demand. Over the past few years, oil
supply growth has been robust and outstripped demand
growth, largely on account of non-OPEC supply (Chart 1.13).
Although non-OPEC supply fell during the four quarters to
2016 Q3 — in part in response to lower oil prices — the
International Energy Agency projects supply to recover in
2017. Uncertainty surrounding a potential OPEC agreement
to limit production was behind some volatility in oil prices in
August and September. An agreement was announced on
28 September that, if implemented, would reduce oil
production from recent levels. In the run-up to the November
Report, oil prices were 12% above their level at the time of the
August Report (Chart 1.12).
Measures of core inflation — which exclude the direct effects
of changes in energy and food prices — remain fairly subdued.
This is likely to reflect some remaining slack in advanced
economies. As global growth picks up (Section 5), this should
reduce slack and put upward pressure on domestic costs and
core inflation. The near-term projection is for an increase
in headline inflation globally, little changed from three
months ago.
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Contribution to supply growth: non-OPEC
Contribution to supply growth: OPEC
Total supply growth (per cent)
Total demand growth (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 1.13 Oil supply growth has slowed to below
demand growth
Four-quarter growth in global oil supply and demand
Sources: International Energy Agency Oil Market Report© OECD/IEA 2016 and
Bank calculations.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Indices: 2014 = 100
Industrial metals prices(a)
Oil price(c)
Agricultural prices(a)(b)
August Report
2014 15 16
Chart 1.12 Oil prices have risen since August
US dollar oil and commodity prices
Sources: Bloomberg, S&P indices, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Calculated using S&P GSCI US dollar commodity price indices.
(b) Total agricultural and livestock S&P commodity index.
(c) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time.
Table 1.D Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in August Developments now anticipated
Advanced economies Broadly unchanged
• Quarterly euro-area growth to
average around ¼%. Annual inflation
to increase.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average
a little above ½%. Annual PCE
inflation to pick up in coming months,
averaging a little below 1½%.
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average
between ¼% and ½%. Annual euro-area
HICP inflation to increase to above 1%
around the turn of the year.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a little
above ½%. Annual US PCE inflation to pick
up in coming months as past falls in oil
prices drop out of the annual calculation,
reaching 2% in the first half of 2017.
Rest of the world Broadly unchanged
• Average four-quarter PPP-weighted
EME growth of around 4¼%; Chinese
GDP growth to average around 6½%.
• Average four-quarter PPP-weighted EME
growth of around 4¼%; Chinese GDP
growth to average around 6½%.
Commodity prices and the exchange
rate
Sterling lower than expected
Oil prices higher than expected
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to
evolve in line with the conditioning
assumptions.
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to evolve
in line with the conditioning assumptions.
Developments anticipated in August Developments now anticipated
Cost of credit Revised down slightly
• Credit spreads to increase slightly. • Credit spreads to remain broadly flat.
Consumer spending Revised up slightly
• Quarterly consumption growth to slow
gradually to around ¼% in 2017 Q1.
• Quarterly consumption growth has been
revised up in the near term and is
expected to average ¼% in 2016 Q4 to
2017 Q2.
Housing market Revised up
• Mortgage approvals to average around
56,000 a month.
• The average of the Halifax and Nationwide
house price indices is expected to decline
a little over the next year.
• Quarterly growth in housing investment
to average -1%.
• Mortgage approvals to average around
65,000 per month.
• The average of the Halifax and
Nationwide house price indices is
expected to increase by ½% per quarter.
• Housing investment to be flat.
Business investment Revised up
• Business investment to fall by around
1¾% a quarter, on average.
• Business investment to fall by around
¾% a quarter, on average.
Table 2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
12 Inflation Report November 2016
2 Demand and output
In August, the MPC projected that demand growth would slow
materially in 2016 H2 (Chart 2.1), although there was
considerable uncertainty around that judgement and the
precise extent and timing of any slowing was hard to judge
from the range of indicators available. Measures of
uncertainty in the economy had picked up ahead of the June
referendum and rose further in July. That appeared to be
weighing on indicators of activity and property markets. For
example, the July Markit/CIPS business survey — which has in
the past been a better gauge of official output data than most
other survey measures — pointed to a weaker outlook than in
the MPC’s August projections, consistent with a sharp fall in
activity. Uncertainty was expected to remain elevated in the
near term, reflecting the range of possible outcomes for the
United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements and their
differing implications for economic activity and incomes.
Since then, the slowing in growth has been much less severe
than those indicators initially suggested. According to the
latest ONS estimates, GDP growth slowed only slightly to
0.5% in 2016 Q3 from 0.7% in Q2 (Chart 2.1). It is expected
to remain at 0.5% in the mature estimate, compared to the
August projection of 0.1%. The slowing in Q3 mainly reflected
falls in manufacturing and construction output (Chart 2.2).
Growth in business-facing service sectors also slowed
somewhat. In part, this is likely to have reflected a weakening
in commercial real estate transactions (Section 2.1). In
contrast, output growth in consumer-facing service sectors
strengthened, suggesting household demand growth remained
robust.
While survey measures of expected activity continued to
decline slightly in Q3 as a whole, some monthly indicators
such as the Markit/CIPS measure recovered in August and
September from their July lows (Chart 2.3). Overall, GDP
growth is projected to slow slightly further to 0.4% in
2016 Q4, consistent with a preliminary estimate of 0.4%.
Within the modest slowing in GDP growth in 2016 H2,
Output grew by 0.5% in Q3. This was slightly lower than Q2 growth and a much less marked
slowing than expected at the time of the August Report. The near-term outlook for growth is also
stronger. While investment intentions have weakened further since August, household spending
appears to have remained robust and conditions in the housing market have been resilient. The
past depreciation in sterling should support net trade and will boost the sterling value of foreign
income, helping to narrow the current account deficit.
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Projection(c)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
Projection for preliminary GDP
 at the time of the August Report(c)
GDP
Estimate implied by the mode
 of the latest backcast(b)
+
–
2012 13 14 15 16
Chart 2.1 GDP growth is projected to slow slightly
further in Q4
Output growth and Bank staff’s near-term projection(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures. GDP is at market prices.
(b) The latest backcast, shown to the left of the vertical line, is a judgement about the path for GDP
in the mature estimate of the data. The observation for 2016 Q4, to the right of the vertical line,
is consistent with the MPC’s central projection.
(c) The magenta diamond shows Bank staff’s central projection for the preliminary estimate of GDP
growth in 2016 Q3 at the time of the August Report, which was consistent with growth of 0.1%
in the mature estimate as shown in Chart 2.13 of the August Report. The green diamond shows
the current staff projection for the preliminary estimate of GDP growth in 2016 Q4. The bands
on either side of the diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on one root
mean squared error of past Bank staff forecasts for quarterly GDP growth made since 2004.
 Section 2 Demand and output 13
business investment appears likely to have fallen, while
consumption growth appears to have remained robust, and
spending is likely to be supported by the MPC’s policy package
(Section 2.1). A broad-based indicator of the level of
uncertainty has fallen from its July peak, although it remains
above its long-run average and firms responding to the CBI
survey reported that their uncertainty about the outlook for
demand increased markedly in Q3 (Chart 2.4). Net trade is
also projected to support GDP growth in coming quarters
(Section 2.2), although it is likely to be sensitive to changes in
perceptions of the United Kingdom’s future trading
arrangements (see the box on pages 21–22).
2.1 Domestic demand
Business spending
Business investment rose modestly in Q2 (Table 2.B) but was
lower than a year ago. These early data are, however, volatile
and prone to revision.(1) At the time of the August Report,
survey indicators and intelligence from the Bank’s Agents
suggested that the heightened level of uncertainty around the
outlook was weighing on firms’ investment intentions, and
business investment was projected to fall in the near term.
Since then, survey indicators have, on average, weakened
further (Chart 2.5). The stronger outlook for output growth
suggests, though, that investment is likely to fall by less than
projected in August (Table 2.A).
A number of factors are likely to be affecting the outlook for
investment. First, heightened uncertainty following the
referendum is likely to weigh on companies’ investment
decisions.(2) Second, investment could be affected by any
decisions by firms to reallocate capital in anticipation of
changes in UK trading arrangements. Third, the 21%
depreciation in sterling since November 2015 (Section 1) will
raise the cost of imported capital goods. As a significant
proportion of investment is relatively capital-intensive, this
may deter some investment spending.
Prices and activity in the commercial real estate (CRE) market
can also affect companies’ spending in a number of ways.
Around a quarter of investment directly reflects spending on
new and existing buildings, including costs associated with
CRE transactions, such as legal fees. While CRE market
activity will directly affect that transaction expenditure,
sentiment in the market may also affect investment more
broadly. In addition, many firms use property as collateral for
borrowing. Fluctuations in CRE prices can, therefore, affect
their access to finance.
(1) See Chart 2.10 of the May 2016 Report; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/inflationreport/2016/may.pdf.
(2) For a discussion of the effect of uncertainty on companies’ investment decisions see
the box on pages 14–15 of the May Report and Broadbent, B (2016), ‘Uncertain times’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech929.pdf.
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
Differences from averages since 2000
(number of standard deviations)
Markit/CIPS(b)
CBI(a)
BCC(c)
+
–
2008 10 12 14 16
Chart 2.3 The Markit/CIPS indicator of expected output
has recovered from its July low
Survey indicators of expected output growth
Sources: BCC, CBI, IHS Markit and Bank calculations.
(a) Net percentage balance of respondents reporting that they expect output/business/sales to
increase in the next three months for manufacturing and business/consumer/professional
services, and next month for distributive trade sectors; quarterly average of monthly data.
Weighted together using output shares.
(b) Monthly data to September 2016. Net percentage balance of companies reporting that they
expect business activity to rise over the next twelve months (services and construction) or
that new orders have increased over the month (manufacturing). Weighted together using
output shares.
(c) Net percentage balance of respondents in the non-services and services sectors reporting
that they expect turnover to increase in the next year, weighted together using output
shares. Data are non seasonally adjusted.
+
–
Other services(b) (19%)
Other production(c) (5%)
Construction (6%)
Manufacturing (10%)
Business-focused services (33%)
Consumer-focused services (27%)
Output gross value added (GVA)
 growth (per cent)
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2013–14 2015 2016 H1 2016 Q3
Percentage points
Chart 2.2 Output grew by 0.5% in Q3
Contributions to average quarterly GVA growth by output
sector(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures at basic prices. Contributions may not sum to the total due to
rounding. Service industries are defined as ‘consumer-focused’ if the share of their output
that is directly consumed exceeds the share of output that is sold to other businesses to be
used as intermediate inputs, while the reverse is true for ‘business-focused’ service sectors.
Calculated using the United Kingdom Input-Output Analytical Tables 2010. Figures in
parentheses are weights in nominal GDP in 2013.
(b) Other services includes: public administration and defence; health services and education.
(c) Other production includes: utilities; extraction and agriculture.
14 Inflation Report November 2016
Defined-benefit pension fund deficits and the
real economy
Pension funds invest upfront contributions to provide
payments to beneficiaries on retirement. There are two
main types of pension funds: defined-benefit and
defined-contribution. Payouts by defined-contribution funds
depend on the return earned on investments, while for
defined-benefit funds, the value of those payments is specified
in advance. When calculating the current value of
defined-benefit pension funds’ assets and liabilities, those
future payments are typically discounted in line with a
benchmark yield curve. As a result, the value of their liabilities
can increase when long-term interest rates fall.
The overall effect of changes in long-term interest rates on the
net value of a pension fund and hence the degree to which it is
in deficit will depend, however, on how the value of its assets
change. For example, falls in interest rates associated with an
easing in monetary policy will typically boost the value of both
assets and liabilities. All else equal, therefore, funds starting
from a balanced position will typically remain so, although
those funds starting from a deficit position would probably see
some widening in their deficits.(1)
When deficits have increased in the past, they have typically
closed over time as pension funds’ assets have historically
earned a higher average return than the interest rates used to
calculate the value of their liabilities. This has not, however,
been the case over the past five years, as falls in long-term
interest rates have outpaced increases in the prices of riskier
assets, such as equities, and pension deficits have widened
(Chart A).(2) As explained in the box on pages 8–9, most of
those falls in the yield curve are likely to have reflected the
influence of global factors such as increased risk aversion.
There are around 6,000 defined-benefit pension schemes in
the United Kingdom, of which around 80% are currently in
deficit. One timely measure of the size of the aggregate
deficit is provided by the Pension Protection Fund. On that
measure, UK defined-benefit pension funds had a deficit of
29% of their assets at the end of September (Chart A).
Although that deficit has widened over much of the past year,
it narrowed slightly in September and is likely to have
narrowed further in October, in line with the rise in long-term
interest rates (Section 1).
The widening in defined-benefit pension funds’ deficits over
recent years could have macroeconomic consequences if it
influences businesses’ decisions such as their spending, hiring
and dividend payouts. This box examines the evidence, so far,
on their macroeconomic effects, drawing on the results of a
recent survey by the Bank’s Agents.
Economic implications
An increase in pension deficits could affect businesses’
decisions through two key channels. One channel is if firms
reduce spending in order to increase their pension
contributions. Firms are required by The Pensions Regulator to
have plans in place to close their deficits. When making those
plans, however, companies are allowed to consider their
forecast for cash flows after essential investment and their
plans for sustainable growth. As such, defined-benefit pension
contributions have been broadly stable over the past decade
despite fluctuations in the size of deficits.
The second key channel is if an increase in pension deficits
raises firms’ financing costs. The widening in deficits since
2014 does not, however, appear to have dragged on the equity
prices of those companies compared with the broader index
(Chart B). Factors other than pension deficits, however, such
as the depreciation in sterling, are likely to have supported
these companies’ equity prices more recently, perhaps
because they are on average more internationally focused
(Section 1).
Perhaps consistent with that, there is little evidence so far to
suggest that changes in pension deficits have weighed on
firms’ spending decisions in aggregate. While past analysis by
Bank staff and other researchers has found that companies’
(1) See Bean, C (2012), ‘Pension funds and quantitative easing’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/news/2012/050.pdf for a
discussion of the effects of monetary policy on pension fund assets and liabilities.
(2) See Broadbent, B (2016), ‘Uncertain times’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/speeches/2016/speech929.pdf for a more detailed discussion of this issue.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
2007 09 11 13 15
Per cent Per cent
Fifteen-year yield(a)
 (left-hand scale)
Pension fund balance(b)
 (right-hand scale)
+
–
Chart A Defined-benefit pension fund deficits have
widened as long-term yields have fallen
Fifteen-year government bond yield and the balance on
UK defined-benefit pension funds as a proportion of total assets
Sources: Bloomberg, Pension Protection Fund and Bank calculations.
(a) Monthly average of daily data. Zero-coupon spot rate derived from government bond prices.
Data for October are the average of data for 3 October to 26 October.
(b) Calculated as the aggregate value of pension schemes’ total assets less the value of their
liabilities, divided by the total value of assets. Calculated on a S179 basis, which is the
theoretical cost that would have to be paid to a private insurance company to take on the
level of protection provided by the Pension Protection Fund. As the Fund does not provide
protection for the full liability, this number may be somewhat smaller than a measure (the
technical provisions measure) calculated for each scheme by trustees and considered by
The Pensions Regulator every three years. Data are up to September 2016. 
 Section 2 Demand and output 15
dividend payouts have been affected by the level of pension
deficits, these do not appear to have had a significant
influence on business investment.(1) Changes in pension
deficits may, however, have been important to certain
companies’ spending decisions.
In addition, a recent survey on investment intentions
conducted by the Bank’s Agents suggests that, in aggregate,
pension deficits were not having a significant impact on firms’
investment plans for the coming year (Chart C). Companies
with pension deficits report that this is due to a number of
factors, including: the periods over which they intend to close
their deficits, which have in some cases been extended or were
expected to be extended in future; their balance sheets, which
have strengthened during recent years; and their access to
finance, which has improved. As with investment, there is
little evidence, so far, that the increase in pension deficits has
weighed on employment or wage growth. The Bank’s Agents
and respondents to business surveys have not reported this
factor as being a significant influence on hiring or pay
decisions.
Conclusion
The evidence examined so far suggests that changes in
defined-benefit pension fund deficits do not appear to have
been a significant influence, in aggregate, on firms’ spending
decisions over the past or on their current plans for future
spending.
The effects of low long-term interest rates on defined-benefit
pension fund deficits was one of the main issues discussed
when the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) and the Monetary
Policy Committee (MPC) met on 4 October. Both
Committees will continue to monitor developments in
pension fund deficits and evidence on the implications for the
economic outlook and financial stability closely.
The Committees were also briefed on how the outlook for
economic activity and inflation had evolved since the
August Report, as detailed in the MPC’s September Minutes
and the box on page 5. And they were briefed on how the
outlook for UK financial stability had evolved. As detailed in
the FPC’s September Record, the financial system had
demonstrated resilience to spikes in uncertainty and risk
aversion. Core financial markets had functioned effectively
despite initial sharp price moves and particularly high volumes
of transactions relative to normal levels in some markets.
Bank funding conditions had remained broadly stable. That
reflected the consistent building of resilience in the financial
system over recent years, extensive contingency planning
undertaken by the Bank of England and financial institutions
in the run-up to the referendum, and the co-ordinated actions
taken by the Bank after the referendum.(2)
In addition to defined-benefit pension fund deficits, there were
a number of other issues identified that were particularly
pertinent to both Committees and which they agreed they
would continue to monitor closely in this forum. That
included bank resilience, profitability and future credit
conditions, and the distribution of household indebtedness.
(1) See for example, Tonks, I and Liu, W (2012), ‘Pension funding constraints and
corporate expenditures’; http://people.bath.ac.uk/it237/Research/
Dividend&Investment_Sensitivity.pdf, or Bunn, P and Trivedi, K (2005), ‘Corporate
expenditures and pension contributions: evidence from UK company accounts’,
Bank of England Working Paper No. 276; www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/
Documents/historicpubs/workingpapers/2005/wp276.pdf.
(2) The MPC’s September Minutes can be found at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/Documents/mpc/pdf/2016/sep.pdf;
and the FPC’s September Record can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/records/fpc/pdf/2016/record1610.pdf.
15 10 505 10 15 20 25 30 35
Expected demand for your products
(ie your need for capacity)
Major maintenance needs/replacement
Availability and cost of external finance
Future availability of labour
Reallocation of investment within
wider group
Defined-benefit pension fund deficit
Uncertainty about future trade arrangements
Net percentage balance of respondents
+–
Uncertainty about demand outlook
Achieving future efficiency/productivity gains
Chart C A survey by the Bank’s Agents suggests that
defined-benefit pension fund deficits are not a key
influence on aggregate investment at present
Agents’ survey: factors influencing firms’ investment decisions(a)
(a) Factors influencing investment decisions over the next twelve months compared with the
previous twelve months. The balances show the proportion of companies indicating whether
each factor is pushing down, boosting or has no impact on capital expenditure decisions over the
next twelve months. Respondents could select more than one option. Responses are weighted
by employment and sectors are weighted by turnover. More detail on the survey can be found in
the forthcoming Agents’ summary of business conditions published on 9 November.
80
90
100
110
120
140
130
2014 15 16
Indices: 1 January 2014 = 100
FTSE companies with pension deficit
 to EBITDA ratio greater than 10%
FTSE companies with
 pension deficits
FTSE All-Share
Chart B Equity prices for firms with large pension deficits
do not appear to have fallen relative to other companies
Equity prices: FTSE All-Share and companies with pension
deficits(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream, Worldscope and Bank calculations.
(a) Pension deficits for 2015 used to group companies.
Table 2.B Household consumption growth picked up, while net
trade fell in Q2
Expenditure components of demand(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
 Averages
 1998– 2008– 2010– 2013– 2015 2016
 2007 09 12 14 Q1 Q2
Household consumption(b) 0.9 -0.6 0.2 0.5 0.7 0.7 0.9
Private sector investment 0.7 -4.4 1.6 1.1 0.8 -0.1 0.5
of which, business investment(c) 0.6 -3.0 1.9 0.8 0.5 -1.1 1.0
of which, private sector
housing investment 0.8 -7.4 0.8 2.8 1.5 2.0 -0.5
Private sector final domestic
demand 0.8 -1.3 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.8
Government consumption
and investment(c) 0.8 0.9 -0.1 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.8
Final domestic demand 0.8 -0.8 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.8
Change in inventories(d)(e) 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 -0.1 0.3 -0.4
Alignment adjustment(e) 0.0 -0.1 0.0 0.1 -0.1 -0.5 0.8
Domestic demand(f) 0.8 -0.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.1 1.4
‘Economic’ exports(g) 1.2 -1.1 0.7 0.8 1.3 0.1 -1.1
‘Economic’ imports(g) 1.4 -1.2 0.8 1.1 1.2 0.2 1.3
Net trade(e)(g) -0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.8
Real GDP at market prices 0.7 -0.7 0.4 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7
Memo: nominal GDP at
market prices 1.2 -0.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 1.2 1.5
(a) Chained-volume measures unless otherwise stated.
(b) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Investment data adjust for the transfer of nuclear reactors from the public corporation sector to central
government in 2005 Q2.
(d) Excludes the alignment adjustment.
(e) Percentage point contributions to quarterly growth of real GDP.
(f) Includes acquisitions less disposals of valuables.
(g) Excluding the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC) fraud.
16 Inflation Report November 2016
The CRE market had already weakened markedly in 2016 H1
and this weakness has continued. Despite rising in September,
the value of CRE transactions in Q3 was 40% lower than a year
ago. The RICS commercial property market survey reported a
small rise in occupier demand for CRE, although demand
remains weak, especially in London. Consistent with the
weakness in demand for CRE, prices fell in Q3 and market
contacts and indicators, such as the RICS survey, suggest that
new construction also declined. Market contacts expect
CRE prices to fall further over the coming year.
Businesses’ investment decisions can also be affected by
the cost of finance. The cost of market-based finance for
non-financial companies has changed little since August despite
the rise in benchmark interest rates, as spreads on corporate
bonds have narrowed slightly (Section 1). In addition, banks’
business lending rates, which are generally linked to Bank Rate
or Libor, fell in the months following the MPC’s August
announcement (Table 2 in the box on pages 2–3).
Despite those declines in the cost of finance, net external
finance raised by private non-financial corporations was lower
in 2016 Q3 than in Q2 (Table 2.C). Within that, net issuance of
commercial paper and net new bank lending fell, consistent
with evidence from the Q3 Credit Conditions Survey that firms’
demand for loans declined in Q3. In contrast, corporate bond
issuance picked up and market contacts expect the Bank’s
Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme (Section 1) to support
sterling issuance in coming months. Respondents to the
Credit Conditions Survey expected the cost and availability of
corporate credit to remain stable and demand to remain
subdued in Q4.
While low interest rates should support investment, they can
also increase the value of companies’ liabilities, particularly
those of their pension funds. Firms with large pension deficits
could choose to reduce their investment spending in order to
increase their pension contributions. As explained in the box on
pages 14–15, however, the evidence so far suggests that the size
of pension deficits has not been a major influence on firms’
investment spending in the past. Moreover, a recent survey on
investment intentions conducted by the Bank’s Agents suggests
that, in aggregate, pension deficits were not having any
significant influence on firms’ investment plans.
Household spending and the housing market
In the August Report, consumption growth was projected to
ease gradually in 2016 H2. Indicators of household spending
growth, such as new car registrations and retail sales, and
stronger-than-expected output growth suggest that
consumption growth remained robust in Q3, however. There is
little evidence of uncertainty depressing spending so far.
In the near term, consumption growth is projected to slow
modestly as real income growth slows (Table 2.A). While
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1991 95 99 2003 07 11 15
Differences from averages since 1991
(number of standard deviations)
CBI business
 uncertainty(b)
Principal
 component(c)
Range of
 uncertainty
 indicators(a)
+
–
Chart 2.4 Uncertainty has eased but remains above its
long-run average level
Range of uncertainty measures
Sources: Bloomberg, CBI, Consensus Economics, Dow Jones Factiva, GfK (research on behalf of
the European Commission), Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) A higher number indicates greater uncertainty. Range includes: the average standard
deviation of monthly Consensus Economics forecasts for GDP growth in the current and next
year ahead, seasonally adjusted by Bank staff; the number of media reports citing
uncertainty in four national broadsheet newspapers; survey responses of households to
questions relating to their personal financial situation and unemployment expectations; and
the three-month implied volatilities for the FTSE 100 and sterling ERI — realised volatilities
have been used prior to April 1992 and September 2001 respectively. Media and implied
volatilities data for October are based on daily data up to 26 October.
(b) Quarterly data. CBI survey measure of demand uncertainty as a factor likely to limit capital
expenditure for manufacturing and services — excluding distribution and financial services —
weighted together using shares in value added. Prior to 1998, CBI data are for
manufacturing only.
(c) The first principal component extracted from the set of indicators listed in footnote (a).
 Section 2 Demand and output 17
nominal income growth has been subdued (Section 4), real
income growth over the past year (Table 2.D) has been
boosted by falls in food and energy prices (Section 4). That
increase in purchasing power appears to have supported
robust household consumption growth in 2016 H1. As food
and energy prices have stopped falling, real income growth is
expected to have slowed in 2016 H2. Further ahead, the
pickup in import prices, following the depreciation in sterling,
is likely to weigh further on real income growth.
Households’ confidence in their expected income and financial
situation will influence their decisions to spend or save out of
their current income. The GfK/EC measure of households’
confidence in making major purchases — which has typically
been a good indicator of spending growth — has been above
its long-run average for the past two years (Chart 2.6).
The cost and availability of credit is another key influence
on households’ spending and saving decisions. The cut in
Bank Rate has lowered interest rates on deposits and
borrowing (see the box on pages 2–3). Lower interest rates
will reduce debt-servicing costs for borrowers. Although it will
also reduce the income on deposits for savers, the net effect
will support aggregate consumption. Moreover, the latest
Bank/NMG survey of household finances shows that
households with greater savings, who may be experiencing a
fall in their income from deposits, are also likely to hold more
non-deposit financial assets, which will have risen in value in
response to lower interest rates.
The fall in interest rates will also support household spending
by lowering the cost of consuming now relative to the future.
Household unsecured credit growth was robust over the year
to September and respondents to the Credit Conditions Survey
expect demand for credit to rise in Q4.
Another indicator of households’ spending intentions is their
money holdings, such as deposits. Growth in household
money has been picking up since the start of the year —
annual growth in the M4 measure was 6.9% in September
compared to 3.8% at the end of 2015. Over a similar period,
households appear to have withdrawn money from equity and
property-related funds. As such, the pickup in household
money holdings may, in part, reflect a desire to hold more
liquid assets in the face of uncertainty about the general
economic situation as opposed to a greater desire to spend.
Reflecting robust household confidence and the low level of
interest rates, the saving rate is projected to decline a little
further in coming quarters. There are risks, however, around
that outlook, associated with the impact of general economic
uncertainty on household confidence and the timing of any
such effect. If households were to become less confident in
their prospects for income growth — for example, in response
to any increases in unemployment — then that could be
associated with a rise in precautionary saving.
Table 2.D Real income growth has supported consumption
growth
Household income, consumption and saving
 Averages
 1998– 2010– 2013– 2015 2016
 2007 12 14 H1 H2 Q1 Q2
Percentage changes on a year ago
Real post-tax income(a) 3.0 0.3 1.0 1.3 2.2 2.6 1.7
Real post-tax
labour income(b) 3.4 0.1 1.4 2.0 3.2 1.7 2.7
Consumption(c) 3.5 0.6 1.9 2.5 2.5 2.7 2.9
Per cent
Saving ratio(d) 8.0 9.4 6.7 6.0 6.3 5.6 5.1
Saving out of
available income(e) -1.3 1.7 -0.2 0.1 1.2 1.0 0.9
(a) Total available household resources divided by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(b) Wages and salaries plus mixed income less taxes plus net transfers, divided by the consumer expenditure
deflator.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(d) Percentage of household post-tax income.
(e) Percentage of household post-tax income excluding flows into employment-related pension schemes.
Table 2.C Net finance raised by companies in Q3 was lower than
in Q2
Net external finance raised by private non-financial corporations(a)
£ billions
 Quarterly averages
 2003– 2009– 2013– 2015 2016 2016
 08 12 14 H1 Q3
Loans 11.6 -6.2 -1.5 1.3 6.2 1.3
Bonds(b)(c) 2.9 3.3 3.1 3.1 5.2 6.1
Equities(b) -2.1 1.3 0.2 1.1 0.7 0.3
Commercial paper(b) 0.0 -0.4 -0.3 1.5 -0.6 -3.3
Total(d) 12.9 -1.9 1.6 6.3 10.4 6.8
(a) Includes sterling and foreign currency funds from UK monetary financial institutions and capital markets.
(b) Non seasonally adjusted.
(c) Includes stand-alone and programme bonds.
(d) As component series are not all seasonally adjusted, the total may not equal the sum of its components.
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Differences from averages since 2000
(number of standard deviations)
CBI(b)
 (right-hand
 scale)
EEF(b)
 (right-hand scale)
Business investment(a)
 (left-hand scale)
BCC(c)
 (right-hand scale) Agents(d)
 (right-hand scale)
Percentage change
on a year earlier
+
–
+
–
Chart 2.5 Measures of investment intentions have
weakened further
Business investment and survey measures of investment intentions
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI/PwC, EEF and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measure. Data are to 2016 Q2 and adjust for the transfer of the nuclear
reactors form the public corporation sector to central government in 2005 Q2.
(b) EEF and CBI measures are net percentage balances of respondents reporting that they
have increased planned investment in plant and machinery for the next twelve months.
EEF measure corresponds to the manufacturing sector and CBI sectoral surveys are weighted
together using shares in real business investment.
(c) BCC measure is the net percentage balance of respondents reporting that they have
increased planned investment in plant and machinery. Sectoral surveys are weighted
together using shares in real business investment. Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(d) Agents measure shows companies’ intended changes in investment over the next twelve
months, with sectoral surveys weighted together using shares in real business investment.
Q3 figure reflects data for the average of July and August.
18 Inflation Report November 2016
The housing market and household spending
Since the vote to leave the European Union, household
spending has remained resilient and the housing market
has weakened by less than projected at the time of the
August Report (Section 2.1). Developments in the housing
market and consumption are closely linked. Indeed, house
price inflation and consumption growth have been highly
correlated in the past.
In large part, that close relationship is because household
decisions to consume or buy property are driven by common
factors such as income growth, confidence and financial
conditions. Beyond those common factors, however, there are
a number of channels through which developments in the
housing market and household spending can be interlinked.
This box considers the evidence for three main potential
channels, drawing on household-level data including the latest
Bank/NMG survey of household finances, before considering
estimates from a structural econometric model of the
aggregate relationship between house prices and consumption.
The collateral effect
When house prices rise, the value of homeowners’ equity also
increases. This can allow households to use that increase in
equity as collateral to borrow against. Such a collateral
channel would be expected to result in increases in house
prices being associated with increases in homeowners’
consumption relative to that of renters.
Household-level data from the ONS Living Costs and Food
Survey provide some evidence of a collateral channel over
much of the past 25 years. On average, homeowners’
consumption was more sensitive to changes in house prices
than that of renters.(1) Bank staff estimate that a 10% increase
in house prices was associated with a boost to the level of
consumption averaging 0.5% over the following year, which
was reversed in the subsequent year. The size of that effect is
small, however, compared with the average comovement
between house prices and consumption over the past.
Data on households’ housing equity withdrawals can provide a
cross-check on this estimate, as withdrawals used to fund
consumption are likely to be one of the main ways the
collateral channel influences consumption. Over 1995 to
2014, an estimate of equity withdrawn through mortgage
advances for consumer spending aligns quite closely with the
estimate of the propensity to spend out of the increase in
house prices over that period (Chart A).
In the most recent Bank/NMG survey conducted in
September 2016, there is tentative evidence that the effect of
this channel may be even smaller at the moment. A similar
proportion of homeowners and renters reported that they
would expect to increase their spending in response to a 10%
increase in house prices.
The distributional wealth effect
A rise in house prices may also affect spending by changing
perceptions of wealth. For an individual household this will
depend on their expected future demand for housing as well as
their current demand. For households planning on trading
down in the future, a rise in house prices may mean they
expect to release more cash when they make that move, which
could cause them to spend more now. Those purchasing for
the first time or trading up, however, may need to put in more
cash or take out a larger mortgage when they make that move,
which could lead them to save more now. If the former has a
bigger effect on aggregate spending than the latter, then
increases in house prices would boost spending through this
distributional wealth channel.
The effects of such a channel would be expected to be seen in
a difference in the response of older households’ consumption
to changes in house prices, relative to that of younger
households. Household-level data, however, provide little
evidence of such a difference. Indeed, younger households’
consumption appears to have risen more in response to
increases in house prices than that of older households in the
past.(2) Consistent with that, the latest Bank/NMG survey
(1) This finding is broadly consistent with those of other researchers. See for example
Disney, R, Gathergood, J and Henley, A (2010), ‘House price shocks, negative equity
and household consumption in the United Kingdom’, Journal of the European
Economic Association, Vol. 8(6), pages 1,179–207.
(2) See for example Attanasio, O, Blow, L, Hamilton, R and Leicester, A (2009),
‘Booms and busts: consumption, house prices and expectations’, Economica, Vol. 76,
Issue 301, pages 20–50.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1995 98 2001 04 07 10 13
Cumulative percentage change in level since 1995
Estimate from
 household-level data(b)
Estimate from
 equity withdrawals(a)
+
–
Chart A Changes in house prices appear to have had a
small effect on consumption through the collateral
channel
Estimates of the contribution to consumption through the
collateral channel
Sources: British Household Panel Survey, ONS Living Costs and Food Survey, ONS and
Bank calculations.
(a) Based on data on further mortgage advances and a staff estimate that around half of
housing equity withdrawals are for consumption, while the other half are used for home
improvements, which would be expected to add to the value of the property.
(b) Calculated using staff estimates of the marginal propensity to consume out of an increase in
house prices.
 Section 2 Demand and output 19
suggests that younger households’ spending behaviour
continues to be more responsive to changes in house prices
than that of older households.
The durable goods effect
Moving house is often associated with a greater propensity
to purchase certain durable goods, such as furniture and
household appliances. Changes in the volume of housing
transactions can, therefore, influence the consumption of
these goods. This would support consumption to the extent
that these purchases are not financed by reducing other
consumption.
The British Household Panel Survey provides evidence of such
a durable goods channel. Households are found to be two to
three times more likely to purchase white goods when moving
house.(1) The effect of this channel on consumption is,
however, quite small as household appliances only form 0.6%
of the consumption basket. Those data suggest that an
additional 100,000 housing transactions — close to a doubling
of transactions from the current monthly rate — would be
associated with around a 0.05% increase in annual
consumption.
The overall impact of the housing market on
consumption
Taken together, the evidence suggests that these direct links
from house prices to consumption are too small to explain the
strong correlation seen between consumption and house
prices in the data. That is consistent with an important role
for common factors in driving both. As well as easily observed
variables such as current income, those common factors may
be things that are hard to measure like households’
uncertainty or their future income expectations. House prices
may therefore provide timely information on how these are
changing, and the outlook for household spending, even if
they are not actually driving changes in that outlook
themselves. Macroeconometric models of the economy
typically find a significant link between house prices and
consumption growth. One such model, which is used to
inform the MPC’s projections for consumer spending, suggests
that a one-off 10% rise in house prices would, on average, be
associated with stronger mortgage lending and a boost to the
level of consumption averaging just under 1% over the
following year, fading back to around ½% in the year after.(2)
This impact assumes no additional feedback to household
incomes and other variables. The fact that this is a much
stronger and more persistent effect than suggested by the
microeconometric evidence suggests that the impact of house
prices on consumption in macroeconometric models may
indeed reflect the effect of common factors that are
influencing both, as well as any direct effect of house prices on
spending.
(1) Benito, A and Wood, R (2005), ‘How important is housing market activity for durables
spending?’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer, pages 153–59;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/qb/2005/qb050202.pdf.
(2) Cloyne, J, Thomas, R, Tuckett, A and Wills, S (2015), ‘A sectoral framework for
analysing money, credit and unconventional monetary policy’, Bank of England Staff
Working Paper No. 556; www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/
workingpapers/2015/swp556.pdf.
As explained in the box on pages 18–19, household spending is
closely related to developments in the housing market.
Housing market activity will also have a more direct effect on
housing investment. Around a quarter of housing investment
reflects spending on services associated with housing
transactions. As discussed in the May Report, the
pre-announced rise in stamp duty land tax in April 2016 led
some transactions that would otherwise have taken place later
in the year to be brought forward (Chart 2.7). That resulted in
a sharp rise in transactions in Q1 and a subsequent fall in April.
Since then, housing transactions have risen modestly, though
they remain below their late-2015 levels.
Mortgage approvals, a leading indicator of housing
transactions, have fallen in recent months (Chart 2.7) and
annualised growth in the average of the Halifax and
Nationwide house price indices slowed to 2.5% in the three
months to September from 4.6% in the three months to June.
Both of those were somewhat higher than forward-looking
indicators at the time of the August Report suggested and,
while housing transactions and house price inflation are
projected to remain subdued, the outlook is more resilient
than in August. While the RICS survey balances for new buyer
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
1997 2000 03 06 09 12 15
Major purchases(b)
Differences from averages since 1997
(number of standard deviations)
General economic
 situation expectations(c)
Personal financial
 situation
 expectations(c)
Unemployment
 expectations(a)
 (inverted)
+
–
Chart 2.6 Consumer confidence remains robust
Measures of consumer confidence and unemployment expectations
Sources: GfK (research carried out on behalf of the European Commission) and Bank calculations.
(a) Net balance of respondents expecting that the number of people unemployed will rise over
the next twelve months.
(b) Net balance of respondents reporting that, in view of the general economic situation, now is
the right time for people to make major purchases such as furniture or electrical goods.
(c) Net balance of respondents reporting that they expect their personal financial situation or the
general economic situation to improve over the next twelve months.
20 Inflation Report November 2016
enquiries and price expectations both remain below their
levels at the turn of the year, they have rebounded from their
lows in June and July. The fall in mortgage interest rates
(see the box on pages 2–3) should also be supporting
demand for house purchases. Lenders responding to the
Q3 Credit Conditions Survey reported that demand for
mortgages fell significantly in 2016 Q3, but is expected
to recover in Q4.
Around three quarters of housing investment consists of
investment in new dwellings and improvements to existing
dwellings. At the time of the August Report, heightened
uncertainty was projected to weigh on new housing starts.
The Bank’s Agents and market contacts report that this impact
appears to have been less severe, so far, than projected.
Investment in new dwellings rose in 2016 Q2 and
forward-looking indicators, such as housing starts and new
construction orders also rose. Housing investment is
projected to remain broadly unchanged in the near term
(Table 2.A).
Government spending
The MPC’s November projections are conditioned on the
Government’s spending plans, along with tax and benefit
rates, set out in the March Budget. The MPC’s February 2017
projections will include any changes to those plans and
policies that are announced in the Autumn Statement on
23 November.
2.2 Net trade and the current account
Net trade dragged on growth in the first half of 2016, mainly
reflecting weak growth in exports (Table 2.B). The vote to
leave the European Union is likely to lead to an adjustment in
the composition and size of UK trade flows, reflecting changes
in trading arrangements with other countries. There is
considerable uncertainty around what those eventual
arrangements will be and how quickly trade flows will respond
in anticipation of those changes.
Sterling has depreciated by 21% since its peak in
November 2015. This will affect the prices of UK imports and
exports, which should support net trade through two key
channels — reducing domestic demand for imported goods
and services and supporting foreign demand for UK exports.
As explained in the box on pages 21–22, however, the outlook
for net trade and the extent of that support will be influenced
by a wide range of factors.
Net trade is expected to have supported GDP growth in Q3
and to continue to support growth in the near term. The
Bank’s Agents report that the depreciation in sterling has
supported demand for exports, consistent with rises in survey
indicators of growth in goods export orders (Chart 2.8).
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2000 03 06 09 12 15
CBI
BCC(b)
Markit/CIPS
Agents
Differences from averages since 2000 (number of standard deviations)
+
–
Chart 2.8 Growth in export orders appeared to pick up
in Q3
Survey measures of goods exports(a)
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, IHS Markit and Bank calculations.
(a) BCC and CBI measures are net percentage balances of manufacturing companies reporting
that export orders increased on the quarter. CIPS measure is the net percentage balance of
manufacturing companies reporting that export orders increased this month compared with
the previous month; quarterly average of monthly data. The Agents measure is
manufacturing companies’ reported annual growth in production for sales to overseas
customers over the past three months; Q3 data are for August.
(b) BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Thousands per month
Housing transactions(a)
Mortgage approvals for
 house purchase
Chart 2.7 Housing market activity has weakened
somewhat
Mortgage approvals for house purchase and housing transactions
Sources: Bank of England and HM Revenue and Customs.
(a) Number of residential property transactions for values of £40,000 or above.
 Section 2 Demand and output 21
Net trade and the exchange rate
The United Kingdom’s trade with the rest of the world is an
important component of UK economic activity (Section 2.2).
It will reflect, among other factors, developments in foreign
demand (Section 1), domestic demand (Section 2.1) and the
sterling exchange rate. The depreciation in sterling of 21%
over the past year (Section 1) should support UK exports and
weigh on imports over coming years. But, as set out in this
box, there is uncertainty over the magnitude of these effects,
and net trade — exports less imports — will be sensitive to
how companies anticipate and respond to possible future
changes in the United Kingdom’s trading arrangements.
Trade prices
Movements in sterling are likely to affect export and import
prices, but the scale and timing of that impact will depend on
how exporters and importers respond. The initial ability of
firms to adjust prices will depend on factors such as the length
of contracts and the currency in which exports and imports are
invoiced.
When companies reset prices they face a choice of how much
to adjust them by. For instance, in response to the
depreciation, UK exporters could maintain their export prices
in sterling terms, passing through all of the depreciation to
lower export prices in foreign currency terms. UK export
prices relative to those of the rest of the world, in common
currency terms, would therefore fall. This gain in
competitiveness would support UK export volumes.
Alternatively, exporters could choose to maintain foreign
currency export prices and earn a higher sterling profit margin
on exports sold. That decision for exporters of how much to
adjust prices is likely to depend on: how persistent they
expect the fall in sterling to be; the strength of demand
growth in their export markets; how price-sensitive they judge
demand for their products to be; and how many inputs to
production they import.
At the same time, the pass-through of the fall in sterling to
import prices will depend on a similar set of factors, including
foreign exporters’ pricing strategies in light of conditions in the
UK economy (Section 4).(1) Higher import prices relative to
the prices of available domestic alternatives will make
imported goods and services less competitive, which will
weigh on import volumes.
The overall scale of the boost to net trade from a depreciation
will depend on the extent of these movements in trade prices.
Both export and import prices have typically changed by
about 60% of any change in sterling: for instance, they picked
up by around 15% following the depreciation of sterling of
around 25% in 2007–08 (Chart A). Foreign currency export
prices, therefore, tend to be cut by around 40% of any fall in
sterling: UK exporters become somewhat more competitive
but also allow margins to rise. That increase in export margins
is likely to be gradually competed away, as exporters raise
production or new firms enter export markets, boosting export
supply. But it can take time for capital and labour to shift
between sectors to enable this.
The net trade outlook
The response of trade volumes to changes in trade
prices associated with the fall in sterling and the net trade
outlook in coming years will depend on how domestic and
foreign firms anticipate and respond to the evolution of
UK trading arrangements following the vote to leave the
European Union.(2)
Uncertainty over the United Kingdom’s long-term trading
arrangements could mean that those companies that
currently, or would aspire to, export have less incentive to
invest to expand capacity. For example, UK companies may
delay entering new markets or foreign firms may put off
planned investment in UK-based capacity. In addition,
uncertainty may make EU importers, and perhaps importers in
other countries, reluctant to renew or enter into new contracts
with UK exporters. Trade that is part of supply chains with
other EU countries, crossing borders more than once in the
(1) For more details see the box on pages 28–29 of the November 2015 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/nov.pdf.
(2) For more details see the box on page 29 of the August Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/aug.pdf.
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
1990 92 94 96 98 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Sterling ERI(d)
Relative export
 prices(c)
Export prices(b) Import prices(a)
Indices: 2007 = 100
Chart A Export and import prices increased similarly
following past depreciations
Sterling exchange rate and measures of trade prices
Sources: Bank of England, CEIC, Eurostat, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) UK import prices, excluding the impact of MTIC fraud. The diamond shows Bank staff’s
projection for 2016 Q3.
(b) UK sterling export prices, excluding the impact of MTIC fraud. The diamond shows Bank
staff’s projection for 2016 Q3.
(c) UK sterling export prices, excluding the impact of MTIC fraud, divided by the ratio of
domestic currency export prices of goods and services of 51 countries, weighted together
according to their shares in UK imports, to the sterling effective exchange rate. The sample
excludes major oil exporters. The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2016 Q3.
(d) Quarterly average of daily data. 2016 Q4 data point is the average from 3 October to
26 October.
22 Inflation Report November 2016
production process, may be particularly affected. The
United Kingdom is highly integrated into supply chains:
the latest estimates for 2011 suggest that around a quarter
of UK exports were part of supply chains with other
EU countries.(1)
Developments in net trade in coming years are likely to differ
across the economy. For instance, some goods producers are
particularly integrated into EU supply chains. Some service
sectors such as financial services benefit from relatively open
access to EU markets. The surplus in financial services trade is
around 3% of GDP, around 1¼ percentage points of which is
with the European Union, and it accounts for the majority of
the surplus in services trade (Chart B). Prospects in these
areas of the economy are, therefore, likely to be sensitive to
any changes in trading arrangements.
In addition, there is evidence that increased specialisation in
goods over time may have limited the scope to substitute
easily away from imports to domestically produced goods in
which the United Kingdom may not have a comparative
advantage.(2) Indeed, cross-country evidence suggests that
the increasing role of global supply chains over time may have
steadily reduced the sensitivity of trade volumes to changes in
the exchange rate and trade prices.(3)
The outlook for net trade over the MPC’s forecast horizon is
discussed in Section 5.
(1) This estimate is based on data in the OECD’s World Input-Output database.
(2) For instance, see Kamath, K and Paul, V (2011), ‘Understanding recent developments
in UK external trade’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 51, No. 4,
pages 294–304; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
quarterlybulletin/qb110401.pdf.
(3) See Ahmed, S, Appendino, M A and Ruta, M (2015), ‘Depreciations without exports?
Global value chains and the exchange rate elasticity of exports’, World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper No. 7390.
Payment flows associated with trade and investment between
the United Kingdom and the rest of the world will be reflected
in the current account. The current account deficit widened
slightly to 5.9% of GDP in Q2 from 5.7% in Q1 (Chart 2.9).
This was driven by a widening in the trade deficit, which was
partly offset by a fall in the primary income deficit. Primary
income is the value of net investment income received by
UK residents. As UK residents hold more foreign currency
assets than they have foreign currency liabilities, the
depreciation will have boosted the sterling value of net
primary income. The depreciation will have also boosted the
sterling value of foreign currency assets relative to foreign
currency liabilities, contributing to an improvement in the
United Kingdom’s international investment position.
The current account is projected to narrow further over the
coming quarters as the effects of the depreciation continue to
be passed through to income flows.
Financial services(b)
Goods
Other services
Trade balance
+
–
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
1998 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Percentages of nominal GDP
Chart B The United Kingdom has run a trade surplus in
services
Trade balances by sector(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) At market prices. Excluding the estimated impact of MTIC fraud.
(b) Includes monetary financial institutions, insurance companies, pension providers and other
financial institutions.
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Percentages of nominal GDP
+
–
Secondary income
Primary income
Trade balance
Current account balance
Chart 2.9 The current account deficit widened slightly
in Q2
UK current account
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 23
Output growth appears to have slowed slightly in
2016 H2 (Section 2). Employment growth has also eased
in recent months. Broadly consistent with the continued
softening in survey indicators of employment intentions
(Chart 3.1), employment growth is projected to slow
further in the near term (Section 3.1). That slowing is more
gradual than projected in August (Table 3.B), reflecting
stronger-than-expected output growth.
The unemployment rate and overall slack in the economy are
projected to be broadly stable in the near term (Section 3.2).
Developments in output growth further ahead will depend on
labour supply growth (Section 3.3) and on productivity growth
(Section 3.4). Subdued demand and elevated uncertainty are
likely to weigh on productivity growth, by reducing investment
in physical capital and in skills and innovation. The path for
productivity will also be sensitive to whether firms anticipate
any changes to trading arrangements between the
United Kingdom and its economic partners, and any adaption
of production ahead of the transition to those arrangements
(Section 5).
3.1 Labour demand
Employment growth slowed slightly in the three months to
August (Table 3.A), but was stronger than expected at the
time of the August Report. That slowing is likely in part to
reflect a normalisation in the labour market, following the
absorption of spare capacity and rapid growth in employment
over 2012–15. Consistent with that, indicators suggest that, in
recent quarters, recruitment difficulties have been similar to or
greater than prior to the financial crisis.
In the near term, employment growth is projected to slow
further, to below its past average rate, as companies respond
to the more subdued demand outlook and above-average
levels of uncertainty (Section 2). That is consistent with
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Differences from averages since 2000 (number of standard deviations)
+
–
Manpower(b)
CBI(b)
BCC(b)
Agents(c)
REC(d)
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, KPMG/REC/IHS Markit, Manpower, ONS and
Bank calculations.
(a) Measures for the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and
services) and CBI (manufacturing, financial services, business/consumer/professional services
and distributive trades) are weighted together using employee shares from Workforce Jobs.
The Manpower and REC data cover the whole economy. The BCC data are non seasonally
adjusted.
(b) Net percentage balance of companies expecting their workforce to increase over the next
three months.
(c) End-quarter observation. The scores refer to companies’ employment intentions over the
next six months. 2016 Q3 data are for August.
(d) Quarterly average. Net percentage balance of recruitment agencies’ reports on the demand
from employers for staff placements compared with the previous month.
Chart 3.1 Employment intentions have continued to
soften since the referendum
Survey indicators of employment intentions(a)
3 Supply and the labour market
Employment growth has eased in recent months and surveys of employment intentions point to a
further slowing in the near term. The softening in employment growth in 2016 H2 appears likely,
however, to be more gradual than expected at the time of the August Report. Unemployment is
projected to be stable in the near term. The outlook for output growth will depend in part on
developments in supply, which will be sensitive to changes in trading arrangements between the
United Kingdom and its economic partners. In the near term, productivity growth is projected to
remain subdued.
24 Inflation Report November 2016
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4 Per cent of unemployment
Unemployment to
 employment flow(b)
 (right-hand scale)
Vacancies(a)
 (left-hand scale)
Per cent of the labour force
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 0.0 0
Chart 3.2 Vacancies have been broadly flat recently
Vacancies and flow from unemployment to employment
survey indicators of employment intentions, which fell further
in Q3 (Chart 3.1). That slowing is more gradual than
projected in August, consistent with the stronger path for
output growth in 2016 H2 (Section 2).
The projected further slowing in employment growth mainly
reflects an expected easing in the rate of hiring, rather than an
increase in the rate of job losses. There is uncertainty,
however, around the extent, timing and composition of that
slowing, and there are risks in both directions. To assess
whether the projection for employment growth is on track,
the MPC monitors a wide range of aggregate and sectoral
indicators of the labour market, including official data, survey
evidence and reports from the Bank’s Agents.
One key indicator of hiring is the number of vacancies. The
number of vacancies rose strongly over 2012–14, leading to a
sharp pickup in the rate at which unemployed people found
jobs (Chart 3.2). Since the beginning of 2015, the number of
vacancies has been fairly flat, and is expected to fall slightly in
the near term, broadly consistent with survey indicators of
recruitment intentions. The Bank’s Agents report that the
softening in recruitment intentions since the referendum has
been concentrated in some professional and financial services
subsectors. In addition, in consumer services, the increase in
some wage costs as a result of the National Living Wage —
which came into effect in April (Section 4) — is reported to
have weighed on recruitment intentions.
In contrast, the rates at which employees are made redundant
or move from employment to unemployment for other
reasons have been well below past average levels in recent
quarters (Chart 3.3), and are likely to remain low in the near
term. That is consistent with the stability in indicators of job
losses, such as the Chartered Institute of Personnel and
Development (CIPD) survey of businesses’ redundancy
intentions and the GfK/EC survey of households’ expectations
for unemployment.
3.2 Slack in the economy
Economic slack tries to capture the extent of underused
resources, which may exert downward pressure on inflation.
One important aspect of slack is unemployment. Reflecting
the past strength in labour demand growth, the unemployment
rate fell steadily over 2013–15, and was stable at 4.9% in the
three months to August (Chart 3.4). Consistent with the
near-term projection for employment growth (Section 3.1),
unemployment is projected to remain stable over the rest of
the year, slightly lower than projected in August. Beyond the
near term, unemployment is projected to rise modestly
(Section 5).
Bank staff estimate that the unemployment rate is currently
close to its medium-term equilibrium rate — that consistent
Sources: Labour Force Survey (LFS) and Bank calculations.
(a) Excludes vacancies in agriculture, forestry and fishing. Data for 2016 Q3 are vacancies in
September relative to the size of the labour force in the three months to August.
(b) Two-quarter average. Based on total LFS unemployment of people aged 16–64. Data are
up to 2016 Q2.
Table 3.A Employment growth has slowed
Change in employment, and survey indicators of recruitment difficulties
 Quarterly averages 2016
 2000– 2008– 2010– 2013– 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3
 07 09 12 14
Change in employment
(thousands)(a) 70 -59 67 130 149 44 172 106
of which, employees(a) 55 -67 32 106 112 28 72 120
of which, self-employed
and other(a)(b) 16 7 35 24 37 16 100 -14
Surveys of recruitment difficulties
Agents(c) 1.5 -2.5 -1.1 0.4 2.0 1.5 1.3 1.3
BCC(d) 61 55 51 57 66 69 65 57
CBI, skilled(e) 27 15 16 23 34 35 32 28
CBI, other(e) 8 2 2 3 8 8 5 8
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Changes relative to the previous quarter. Figures for 2016 Q3 are data for the three months to August.
(b) Other comprises unpaid family workers and those on government-supported training and employment
programmes classified as being in employment.
(c) End-quarter observations on a scale of -5 to +5, with positive scores indicating greater recruitment
difficulties in the most recent three months compared with the situation a year earlier. 2016 Q3 data are
for August.
(d) Percentage of respondents reporting recruitment difficulties over the past three months. Non seasonally
adjusted. Services and non-services balances are weighted using employee shares from Workforce Jobs.
(e) Balances of respondents expecting skilled or other labour to limit output/business over the next three
months (in the manufacturing sector) or over the next twelve months (in the financial services,
business/consumer/professional services and distributive trades sectors), weighted using employee shares
from Workforce Jobs.
Table 3.B Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in August Developments now anticipated
Unemployment Revised down slightly
• Unemployment rate to rise to just over
5% by 2017 Q1.
• Unemployment rate to rise to just over
5% by 2017 Q2.
Participation Revised up slightly
• Labour market participation rate to
remain stable at around 63½%.
• Participation rate to fall back slightly,
and then remain just below 63¾% during
2017 H1.
Average hours Broadly unchanged
• Average hours to fall by ¾% in the year
to 2017 Q1.
• Average hours to fall by just under ½% in
the year to 2017 Q2.
Productivity Revised up slightly
• Quarterly hourly labour productivity
growth of around ¼% in the near term.
• Quarterly hourly labour productivity
growth of between ¼% and ½% in the
near term. 
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 25
with neither upward nor downward pressure on wage growth.
There is, however, uncertainty around this judgement.
On the one hand, unemployment could still be above its
equilibrium. Wage growth has remained weak in the face of
the decline in the unemployment rate, which could suggest a
lower equilibrium rate of unemployment. The rising average
age of the workforce and increased degree of educational
attainment over the past two decades are characteristics that
have tended to be associated with lower unemployment rates
and so could have lowered the equilibrium rate. In addition,
some changes in government policy over recent decades, such
as to welfare payments, may have lowered the equilibrium
rate by increasing the incentive and ability to move from
unemployment into employment. Perhaps consistent with
that, the short-term unemployment rate has been below its
pre-crisis average for some time (Chart 3.5), and it does not
appear to have put material upward pressure on wage growth
(Section 4).
On the other hand, the equilibrium rate of unemployment
could be higher. In particular, the long-term unemployment
rate remains above its pre-crisis average (Chart 3.5), despite
strong labour demand in recent years. That could indicate
that the pool of unemployed people may currently be less
well-suited to the available jobs than prior to the crisis. In
addition, increases in the National Living Wage (Section 4)
may be associated with a slight weakening in labour demand
and a small rise in equilibrium unemployment in the medium
term.
Another important aspect of slack in the economy is the
margin of spare capacity within firms. Survey measures of
capacity utilisation have declined (Chart 3.6), as output
growth has slowed, suggesting that capacity pressures have
eased.
Based on the indicators discussed above and top-down
statistical estimates, the MPC’s best collective judgement is
that there is likely to be currently a small degree of slack in the
economy, and this is projected to persist in the near term.
3.3 Labour supply
Beyond the near term, output growth will, in part, be
determined by labour supply. The main driver of growth in
labour supply is population growth. In the MPC’s projections,
population growth is assumed to evolve in line with the ONS’s
latest projection, made in October 2015. Under those
projections, population growth slows over the next three years
in part due to a fall in net migration.
The prospects for net migration at present are particularly
uncertain, and will depend on a number of factors, such as the
United Kingdom’s relative economic performance as well as
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Employment to
 unemployment flow(b)
+
–
Redundancies(a)
Differences from averages since 2000
(number of standard deviations)
Companies’ expected
 redundancies
 (CIPD survey) Households’ (c)
 unemployment
 expectations
 (GfK/EC survey)(d)
Sources: CIPD, GfK (research carried out on behalf of the European Commission),
Labour Force Survey (LFS) and Bank calculations.
(a) Percentage of total LFS employees. Monthly data, to August 2016.
(b) Percentage of total LFS employment of people aged 16–64. Two-quarter average of
quarterly data, to 2016 Q2.
(c) Percentage of employers intending to make redundancies over the next three months. Data
begin in 2009. Quarterly data, to 2016 Q2.
(d) Net balance of respondents expecting that the number of people unemployed will rise over
the next twelve months. Monthly data, to October 2016.
Chart 3.3 Redundancies and indicators of job losses
remain low
Job losses and survey indicators of expected job losses
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
2013 14 15 16 0.0
Per cent
Projection
Three-month
 unemployment rate
Monthly projections
 in August
(a) The magenta diamonds show Bank staff’s central projections for the headline unemployment
rate for the three months to June, July, August and September 2016, at the time of the
August Report. The green diamonds show the current staff projections for the headline
unemployment rate for the three months to September, October, November and
December 2016. The bands on either side of the diamonds show uncertainty around those
projections based on one root mean squared error of past Bank staff forecasts for the
three-month LFS unemployment rate.
Chart 3.4 Unemployment is expected to be stable in
the near term
Unemployment rate and Bank staff’s near-term projection(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
1993 95 97 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Under six months
Six to twelve months
Over twelve months
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The number of people unemployed in each duration category, divided by the economically
active population. Dashed lines are averages from 2002 to 2007.
Chart 3.5 Short-term unemployment remains below,
but long-term unemployment above, its pre-crisis
average rate
Unemployment rates by duration(a)
26 Inflation Report November 2016
government policy. The CIPD survey suggests that a net
balance of companies expect to find it more difficult to recruit
new migrant workers over the next year (Table 3.C). While
net migration contributes to labour supply, it also contributes
to domestic demand, and so changes in migration are likely to
have relatively small implications for inflationary pressure.(1)
Labour supply also depends on the share of the population
actively participating in the labour market. The participation
rate is likely to have risen further in Q3 (Chart 3.7), but is
expected to fall back slightly in Q4, and to remain broadly
stable in coming quarters. That reflects the continuation of
two large but broadly offsetting factors: a fall in the share of
the population in younger age groups most likely to
participate in the labour market, set against increased
participation among older people.
Labour supply will also be influenced by the number of hours
those in work want to work. Average usual hours worked have
been broadly stable over the past two years even though
average actual hours worked have been volatile (Chart 3.8)
due to fluctuations in the extent of leave taken. As discussed
in previous Reports, average usual hours worked are expected
to ease gradually in coming years as the average age of the
workforce continues to rise, while average actual hours are
projected to fall back to a greater extent as the amount of
leave normalises from its currently subdued level.(2)
The outlook for both participation and average hours is
uncertain. On the one hand, there is a risk that, in the face of
a slowing in labour demand growth, some workers become
discouraged from participating in the labour market or seek to
reduce their hours. On the other hand, a slowing in real wage
growth as imported cost pressures pick up (Section 2) could
support desired hours and participation as households attempt
to offset the impact on their income.
3.4 Productivity
Four-quarter hourly productivity growth is expected to have
been broadly stable, but subdued, at 0.5% in Q3 (Chart 3.9).
That is slightly faster than anticipated in August, reflecting
stronger-than-expected output growth (Section 2). Growth in
productivity can be decomposed into changes in capital per
hour worked — the equipment and resources that are available
to produce output — and growth in total factor productivity
(TFP), the efficiency with which firms combine capital and
labour inputs to produce output. Since 2012, growth in capital
per hour has been particularly weak but TFP growth has also
been below its past average rate.
62.6
62.8
63.0
63.2
63.4
63.6
63.8
64.0
2001 04 07 10 13 16
Per cent
0.0
(a) Percentage of 16+ population. The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2016 Q3, based
on data to August.
Chart 3.7 Participation is expected to have increased
in Q3
Labour force participation rate(a)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
1999 2003 07 11 15
BCC
Agents
CBI
Differences from 1999 Q1–2007 Q3 averages
(number of standard deviations)
+
–
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures are produced by weighting together surveys from the Bank’s Agents
(manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the CBI
(manufacturing, financial services, business/consumer/professional services and distributive
trades) using shares in nominal value added. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted. The
Agents’ data for 2016 Q3 are for August.
Chart 3.6 Survey indicators of companies’ capacity
pressures have eased
Survey indicators of capacity utilisation(a)
Table 3.C On balance, firms have revised down planned
investment in training and skills
CIPD survey on companies’ expectations of the effect of the referendum on
business
Proportion of companies (per cent)(a)
 Increase Decrease No effect Don’t know Net
 balance
Ease of hiring EU migrants(b) 2 40 29 29 -38
Ease of hiring
non-EU migrants(b) 10 21 30 40 -11
Training and skills 7 21 59 13 -14
Investment in equipment 5 21 58 16 -16
Domestic capacity relative
to overseas(c) n.a. 16 74 10 n.a.
Export competitiveness(d) 17 21 46 16 -3
Sources: CIPD and Bank calculations.
(a) Survey conducted in July. Due to rounding, the responses may not sum to 100 and the net balances may
not equal the differences between the increase and decrease figures.
(b) Over the next twelve months.
(c) The question asked was whether employers are considering relocating some or all of their current
operations outside of the United Kingdom as a result of the referendum. ‘Decrease’ denotes ‘considering
relocating or focusing expansion outside of the United Kingdom’; ‘no effect’ denotes ‘not considering
relocating’. The possible survey answers did not include considering relocating towards the
United Kingdom.
(d) Companies that do not export are excluded from the figures.
(1) For more details, see the box on pages 30–31 of the May 2015 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/may.pdf.
(2) For more details, see the box on pages 22–23 of the February 2016 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/feb.pdf.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 27
The persistent weakness in productivity growth is likely to
reflect a range of factors. For instance, evidence suggests that
the rate of reallocation of resources, such as the flow of
workers between jobs, has been subdued, while weak wage
growth may have encouraged companies to switch from
capital inputs towards labour.(1) More generally, productivity
growth has been sluggish in many advanced economies for
several years, reflecting the effects of the financial crisis and,
perhaps, an increased divergence between the most
productive firms and the rest.(2) How these factors evolve will
be important for productivity growth in coming years.
Productivity growth will also be sensitive to the eventual
trading arrangements between the United Kingdom and its
economic partners and the transition to those new
arrangements. The box on page 29 of the August Report set
out some of the long-term effects of openness to trade on
productivity growth. It remains difficult to know the nature,
scale and speed of companies’ adjustment in the near term to
any anticipation of changes in future trading arrangements
and to the uncertainty around those arrangements.
In the near term, weak investment stemming from uncertainty
about demand and the United Kingdom’s trading
arrangements (Section 2) is likely to reduce growth in the
capital stock and thus productivity growth. Heightened
uncertainty may also weigh on investment in research, skills
and innovation — so-called ‘intangible’ capital — and so on
TFP growth. Perhaps consistent with that, according to the
CIPD survey, a net balance of companies report having revised
down their plans to invest in training and skills
(Table 3.C). Furthermore, there may need to be some
reallocation of resources if the composition of demand for UK
output changes as trading arrangements change. That could
weigh on TFP growth for some time, as firms adjust resources
and production to meet the new pattern of demand, or if they
are less able to specialise in certain sectors. Overall,
productivity growth is projected to remain subdued in the near
term (Table 3.B), although the outlook remains highly
uncertain and there are risks in both directions (Section 5).
31.0
31.5
32.0
32.5
33.0
33.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
36.5
37.0
37.5
2004 06 08 10 12 14 16
Hours Hours
Average weekly
 actual hours(b)
 (left-hand scale)
Average weekly
 usual hours(a)
 (right-hand scale)
0.0 0.0
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Usual hours exclude leave taken and other temporary variations in hours. Data are up to
2016 Q2.
(b) The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2016 Q3, based on data to August.
Chart 3.8 Usual hours have been more stable than
actual hours
Average weekly hours worked: actual and usual
(1) For more details, see Saunders, M (2016), ‘The economic outlook’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech927.pdf.
(2) For more details, see Andrews, D, Criscuolo, C and Gal, P (2016), ‘The global
productivity slowdown, technology divergence and public policy: a firm-level
perspective’, OECD.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Hourly labour productivity growth(a)
 (per cent)
Total factor
 productivity(c)
Capital per hour(b)

+
–
Percentage points
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Output per hour worked based on the backcast for the final estimate of GDP. Percentage
change on a year earlier. The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2016 Q3, based on
the backcast for the final estimate of GDP and labour market data to August.
(b) Fixed capital stock, including structures, machinery, vehicles, computers, purchased software,
own-account software, mineral exploration, artistic originals and R&D. Calculations are
based on Oulton, N and Wallis, G (2015), ‘Integrated estimates of capital stocks and services
for the United Kingdom: 1950–2013’, Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper
No. 1342.
(c) Calculated as a residual.
Chart 3.9 Productivity growth is expected to have
remained subdued in Q3
Contributions to four-quarter hourly labour productivity growth
28 Inflation Report November 2016
As in the August Report, inflation is projected to continue to rise over the near term. That partly
reflects the effects of past falls in energy prices dropping out of the annual comparison. Further
ahead, higher import prices associated with the past depreciation in sterling and the further
significant fall since August are expected to push up inflation for several years. Only partially
offsetting these effects, subdued domestic demand growth is likely to weigh on wage growth and
domestically generated inflation. Inflation expectations are judged to be broadly consistent with
the MPC’s 2% target.
4.1 Consumer price developments and the
near-term outlook
CPI inflation picked up to 1.0% in September, from 0.5% in
June (Chart 4.1), but remains below the 2% target. The
deviation of inflation from the target has largely reflected
drags from energy and food prices (Chart 4.2). While that has
mainly been a result of falls in global commodity prices, the
appreciation in sterling between 2013 and 2015 has also
lowered energy and food prices, as well as imported goods and
services inflation more broadly. In addition, muted labour cost
growth has weighed slightly on domestic inflationary
pressures. Measures of core inflation — which exclude
components such as energy and food — have therefore also
been subdued, reflecting both the past appreciation and
weaker labour cost growth.
The rise in headline inflation to September largely reflected
the drag from past falls in commodity prices continuing to
drop out of the annual rate (Chart 4.2). As such it was
broadly in line with the projections in recent Reports
(Chart 4.1). Clothing and footwear price inflation was,
however, somewhat stronger than expected three months ago.
As in the August projection, CPI inflation is projected to
continue to rise over the next three months (Chart 4.1) and
over 2017. The contribution to inflation from petrol prices is
expected to turn increasingly positive, in part reflecting rises in
oil prices since January (Section 4.2). In addition, sterling has
depreciated by 21% since its peak in November 2015, which
will continue to push up the prices of energy and other
imported goods and services.
The precise path for inflation will depend on the speed and
degree to which companies pass through rising external costs
(Section 4.2) to consumer prices, given domestic conditions
(Section 4.3). Subdued domestic demand growth (Section 2)
4 Costs and prices
1
0
1
2
3
4
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Projection
Percentage change in prices on a year earlier
CPI
2013 14 15 16
+
–
Chart 4.1 CPI inflation is projected to continue to rise in
the near term
CPI inflation and Bank staff’s near-term projection(a)
(a) The green diamonds show Bank staff’s central projection for CPI inflation in July, August and
September 2016 at the time of the August Inflation Report. The blue diamonds show the
current staff projection for October, November and December 2016. The bands on each side
of the green and blue diamonds show the root mean squared error of the projections for
CPI inflation one, two and three months ahead made since 2004.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 29
is likely to weigh somewhat on companies’ margins and wage
growth, and offset slightly the upward pressure from external
costs on inflation. The influence of domestic pressure on
inflation will also depend on companies’ and households’
inflation expectations, insofar as they influence wage and
price-setting behaviour (Section 4.4).
4.2 Imported cost pressures
Consumer goods and services are produced using a range of
inputs. While companies can adjust the composition of their
inputs over the medium term, there is a limited ability to do so
over short time frames. Sharp fluctuations in the cost of
inputs are therefore likely to affect overall costs.
Much of the volatility in the cost of producing consumer
goods and services over recent years has reflected energy and
non-energy import costs (Chart 4.3). This includes a period of
falling energy prices and other import costs over the past
three years, but these components have begun to push up
overall cost growth more recently.
Energy prices
In the run-up to the November Report, sterling oil prices had
risen by 20% since the August Report. They were around 70%
higher than at the end of 2015, unwinding a third of the fall
since 2013 (Chart 4.4). That reflected higher US dollar oil
prices (Section 1), together with the depreciation in sterling.
The cost of oil currently makes up around a quarter of the cost
of retail fuel, and changes in oil prices tend to be passed
through to retail prices quickly. The contribution of petrol
prices to inflation is therefore expected to rise over the
coming months, as past falls drop out of the annual
comparison and more recent oil price rises are passed through
to retail fuel prices. Indeed, petrol prices were a little higher
in September than a year ago, pushing up CPI inflation
(Chart 4.2).
The wholesale gas spot price has been volatile in recent
months, but futures prices are little changed relative to August
(Chart 4.4). As a result, retail gas prices are projected to
remain flat over the near term, in line with the August
projections.
Non-energy import prices
The sharp fall in sterling is also likely to put significant upward
pressure on non-energy import prices in the coming year.
Foreign currency export prices have continued to fall
(Chart 4.5), in part reflecting falls in US dollar agricultural
prices (Section 1). Sterling has, however, depreciated by 21%
since its November 2015 peak, with 6½% having occurred
since the August Report. Reflecting the effects of that
depreciation, four-quarter sterling non-energy import price
inflation is expected to have risen to 6½% in 2016 Q3, from
Table 4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in August Developments now anticipated
Household energy prices Broadly unchanged
• Domestic gas and electricity prices to be
unchanged in 2016.
• Domestic gas and electricity prices to be
unchanged in the first half of 2017.
Import prices Revised up significantly
• Non-fuel import prices to rise by 6% in
the year to 2017 Q1.
• Non-fuel import prices to rise by almost
9% in the year to 2017 Q2.
Earnings growth Revised down slightly
• Four-quarter AWE growth to be around
2¾% at the turn of the year.
• Four-quarter AWE growth to be between
2½% and 2¾% in the first half of 2017.
Unit labour costs Revised down slightly
• Weak productivity growth means that
four-quarter growth in whole-economy
unit labour costs reaches 2¼% by the
turn of the year.
• Weak productivity growth means that
four-quarter growth in whole-economy
unit labour costs reaches just under 2%
by 2017 Q2.
Inflation expectations Broadly unchanged
• Indicators of inflation expectations
continue to be broadly consistent with
the 2% target.
• Indicators of medium-term inflation
expectations continue to be broadly
consistent with the 2% target.
2
0
2
4
6
2011 12 13 14 15 16
Fuels and lubricants (3%) Electricity and gas (4%)
Food and non-alcoholic
 beverages (10%)
Services (48%) Other goods(b) (35%)
CPI inflation (per cent)
Percentage points
Projection(c)
+
–
Chart 4.2 The drag from food and petrol prices has
begun to fade
Contributions to CPI inflation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, ONS and
Bank calculations.
(a) Contributions to annual CPI inflation. Figures in parentheses are weights in the CPI basket
in 2016.
(b) Calculated as the difference between CPI inflation and the other contributions identified in
the chart.
(c) Bank staff projection. Electricity and gas prices projections assume prices are broadly
unchanged over the remainder of 2016. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department for
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy petrol price data for October 2016 and are then
based on the November 2016 sterling oil futures curve shown in Chart 4.4.
30 Inflation Report November 2016
2½% in Q2, and is projected to remain elevated over the next
year.
As discussed in previous Reports, Bank staff estimate that, on
average, 60% of changes in sterling foreign export prices tend
to be reflected in UK import prices, with that pass-through
usually completed within a year.(1) Within that, the speed and
extent of pass-through will vary by product or service. In
particular, the prices of highly tradable goods, such as food,
are likely to see greater pass-through.
The latest official data on import prices appear broadly
consistent with the decline in sterling passing through in line
with that estimate. The extent of pass-through to consumer
prices will, however, depend on the factors underlying the
change in the exchange rate, as well as prevailing economic
conditions.
4.3 Domestic cost pressures and companies’
margins
In addition to imported cost pressures, the outlook for
inflation will depend on domestic developments. While
domestically generated inflation (DGI) is not directly
observable, a range of indicators suggest that it has picked up
in recent quarters, although it remains subdued (Chart 4.6).
Those indicators include labour costs — the largest component
of domestic costs — and companies’ profit margins. Overall,
the profile for consumer price inflation will depend
significantly on when and to what degree companies pass on
changes in costs — both imported and domestic — or absorb
them in their margins.
Companies’ margins
Margins on consumer goods and services were squeezed
during the financial crisis by higher external costs (Chart 4.3),
reflecting higher global commodity prices and the
depreciation in sterling. Since then, they have recovered and
Bank staff estimate that margins were close to their pre-crisis
levels in early 2016 (Chart 4.7).
Margins appear to have narrowed in 2016 Q2 and are likely to
be squeezed further in the near term, as higher import costs
are only gradually passed through to consumer prices. As
discussed in previous Reports, Bank staff estimate that, on
average, changes in import prices are eventually passed
through to the CPI in full — implying margins are restored over
time.(2) As the import content of the CPI is around 30%,
together with the estimate that around 60% of changes in
the exchange rate are passed through to import prices
(Section 4.2), that would imply the depreciation in sterling
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Foreign export
 prices in foreign currency(d)
Foreign export prices
 in sterling terms(b)
UK import price deflator(c)
+
–
16
Chart 4.5 The fall in sterling has pushed up import price
inflation
UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel(a)
Sources: Bank of England, CEIC, Eurostat, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) The diamonds show Bank staff’s projections for 2016 Q3.
(b) Domestic currency non-oil export prices as defined in footnote (d), divided by the sterling
effective exchange rate.
(c) UK goods and services import deflator excluding fuels and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(d) Domestic currency non-oil export prices of goods and services of 51 countries weighted according
to their shares in UK imports. The sample excludes major oil exporters.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2007 09 11 13 15 17
November 2016 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
Pence per therm £ per barrel
Oil(a)
 (right-hand scale)
Gas(b)
 (left-hand scale)
August 2016 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
Chart 4.4 Sterling oil prices have risen over the past year
Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time converted into sterling.
(b) One-day forward price of UK natural gas.
(c) Averages during the fifteen working days to 26 October 2016 and 27 July 2016 respectively.
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1998 2002 06 10 14
Percentage points
Energy Unit cost growth (per cent) (b) Imports
Labour Tax
+
–
Chart 4.3 Much of the volatility in companies’ unit costs
has reflected energy and import costs
Estimated contributions to four-quarter growth in unit costs for
consumer goods and services(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The underlying weights attached to each cost component are based on the United Kingdom
Input-Output Analytical Tables 2010, adjusted to reflect the composition of CPI. Where
applicable, the weights capture each factor’s contribution to all stages of the domestic
production process.
(b) Includes imports, labour costs and tax associated with energy inputs.
(1) For further discussion see the box on pages 28–29 of the November 2015 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/nov.pdf.
(2) See the box on pages 28–29 of the November 2015 Report, ibid.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 31
since November 2015 will eventually increase consumer prices
by around 3½%.
On average over the past, pass-through is estimated to have
occurred relatively gradually, with annual inflation still being
affected four years after the change in sterling. The speed of
pass-through associated with a fall in sterling, however, will
depend on a number of factors, including the reasons for
the depreciation. There is evidence to suggest that the
pass-through of exchange rate moves that stem from supply
developments tends to be faster,(1) as does the
pass-through from large moves in the exchange rate.(2)
Following the recent further fall, sterling has depreciated by
21% since its November 2015 peak, some of which has
occurred alongside stronger-than-expected activity growth
(Section 2), and appears to be associated with an increase in
perceptions that the United Kingdom’s future trading
arrangements with the European Union might be less open
than previously thought likely (Section 1), and so a weaker
outlook for supply. As such, the MPC judges that the speed of
pass-through from import prices to consumer prices is likely to
be somewhat faster than on average over the past (Section 5).
Wages and labour costs
Labour costs account for the majority of the domestic cost of
production. The degree to which labour costs, such as wages
and non-wage benefits, affect prices will depend on how these
costs evolve relative to how much output is being produced —
known as unit labour cost growth.
While wage growth has remained weak (Table 4.B), that has
occurred alongside weak productivity growth, so unit labour
cost pressures within companies have not been as weak
(Chart 4.8). One factor that is likely to have affected both
wage and productivity growth over the recent past — and so
perhaps had a limited impact on unit labour costs — has been
changes in the composition of the workforce. The proportion
of jobs associated with lower pay and productivity fell during
the crisis, which will have boosted average pay and
productivity growth over that period (Chart 4.9). That
subsequently began to unwind, with roles associated with
lower pay forming a larger-than-usual share of net
employment growth. The effect on wages of the changing
composition of the workforce appears, however, to have
stabilised over the past year, and Bank staff estimate that the
associated drag on wage and productivity growth has
therefore diminished.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1998 2002 06 10 14
Percentage point deviation from average since 1998
+
–
Chart 4.7 Companies’ profit margins have recovered
since the crisis
Estimated margins on consumer goods and services(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calculated as differences in the ratio of the CPI, seasonally adjusted by Bank staff, and the
costs identified in Chart 4.3.
(1) See, for example, Forbes, K, Hjortsoe, I and Nenova, T (2015), ‘The shocks matter:
improving our estimates of exchange rate pass-through’, External MPC Unit Discussion
Paper No. 43; www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/externalmpc/
extmpcpaper0043.pdf.
(2) See, for example, Bonadio, B, Fischer, A and Saure, P (2016), ‘The speed of the
exchange rate pass-through’, Swiss National Bank, which discusses the speed of
pass-through following the appreciation of the Swiss franc in 2015.
Percentage changes on a year earlier
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Average of DGI measures
Range of DGI measures(a)
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
+
–
Chart 4.6 Measures of DGI have risen but remain subdued
Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI)
(a) Includes: whole-economy labour costs divided by GDP, based on the backcast of the final
estimate of GDP; private sector AWE total pay divided by private sector productivity, based
on the backcast of the final estimate of GDP; the GDP deflator; the GVA deflator excluding
government; and the services producer prices index.
32 Inflation Report November 2016
Subdued unit labour cost growth (Chart 4.8) suggests that
something other than subdued productivity growth is
weighing on labour costs. While elevated unemployment
following the financial crisis will have depressed wage growth,
that effect is likely to have largely diminished as
unemployment has fallen back. There is a possibility, however,
that some degree of slack remains in the labour market and is
continuing to weigh on wage growth (Section 3). In addition,
falls in global food and energy prices since 2014 have
supported growth in households’ real incomes (Section 2) and
some contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that this has
reduced some of the pressure on companies to increase
nominal wages. It is also possible that an increased ability to
hire people from abroad over the past decade could have
reduced the sensitivity of wage growth to domestic labour
market conditions.
Wage growth is projected to remain subdued over the near
term reflecting continued weak productivity growth
(Section 3), although there are risks in both directions. Higher
import prices could put upward pressure on wages if
employees seek greater pay rises to reduce the hit to their
purchasing power. Conversely, companies could seek to offset
the reduction in their margins associated with higher import
prices by attempting to push down other costs, including
wages.
The National Living Wage (NLW), which came into effect in
April 2016, will continue to increase wages for some
employees in coming years.(1) According to the Annual Survey
of Hours and Earnings, conducted immediately following the
introduction of the NLW in April, wage growth towards the
lower end of the income distribution appeared to have been a
little stronger than previously expected. The impact of that on
aggregate wage growth was small, however, and Bank staff’s
estimate of the overall effect of the NLW on wage growth is
little changed. The Bank’s Agents report that companies are
seeking to limit the impact on their overall costs; for example
by reducing other aspects of pay, such as overtime payments,
or by investing to increase productivity. The CIPD survey
suggests that while some employers are seeking to improve
efficiency, the most common response to date has been to
absorb higher pay in profit margins. That could lead to a
further drive to reduce costs if companies seek to restore their
margins in the face of further rises in the National Living
Wage, or some of the additional cost could be reflected in
higher prices.
Table 4.B Wage growth remains subdued
Indicators of annual wage growth
Per cent
Averages 2016
2002–07 2010–12 2014 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3
(1) Total AWE(a) 4.2 2.0 1.2 2.4 2.0 2.5 2.3
(2) AWE regular pay(a)(b) 3.9 1.8 1.3 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.3
(1)–(2) Bonus contribution(a)(c) 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.1 -0.2 0.2 0.0
Pay settlements(d) 3.2 1.7 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1
Survey indicators of pay growth
CBI(e) n.a. 1.6 2.0 2.3 2.3 2.1 2.2
REC(f) 56.7 52.4 63.1 61.9 58.9 58.0 54.6
Agents(g) 2.4 1.3 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9
CIPD(h) n.a. 1.2 2.0 1.8 1.7 1.1 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CIPD, Incomes Data Services, KPMG/REC/IHS Markit, the Labour Research
Department, ONS, XpertHR and Bank calculations.
(a) Figures for 2016 Q3 are data for the three months to August.
(b) Whole-economy total pay excluding bonuses and arrears of pay.
(c) Percentage points. The bonus contribution does not always equal the difference between total AWE growth
and AWE regular pay growth due to rounding.
(d) Average over the past twelve months, based on monthly data.
(e) Measures of expected wages for the year ahead. Produced by weighting together balances for
manufacturing, distributive trades, business/consumer/professional services and financial services using
employee job shares.
(f) Produced by weighting together survey indices for the pay of permanent and temporary placements using
employee job shares; quarterly averages. A reading above 50 indicates growth on the previous month and
those below 50 indicate a decrease. The greater the divergence from 50, the greater the rate of change
signalled by the index. Quarterly average.
(g) End-quarter observation for manufacturing and services weighted together using employee job shares. The
scores refer to companies’ labour costs over the past three months compared with the same period a year
earlier. Scores of -5 to 5 represent rapidly falling and rapidly rising respectively, with zero representing no
change. Data for 2016 Q3 are for August.
(h) Pay increase intentions excluding bonuses over the coming year. Data only available since 2012.
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Non-wage labour costs per head Productivity
Wages, salaries and self-employment
 income per head(b) Unit labour cost growth (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 4.8 Unit labour cost growth has been broadly
stable
Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy unit labour cost
growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Whole-economy labour costs divided by GDP, based on the backcast of the final estimate of
GDP. The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2016 Q3.
(b) Self-employment income is calculated from mixed income, assuming that the share of
employment income in that is the same as the share of employee compensation in nominal
GDP less mixed income.
(1) For further details see the box on page 24 of the August 2015 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/aug.pdf. 
 Section 4 Costs and prices 33
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Total pay adjusted for
 compositional effects(a)
Total pay
+
–
Chart 4.9 The drag on wage growth from compositional
effects has diminished
Whole-economy total pay
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Estimates of the effect of individual and job characteristics are derived from a regression of
these characteristics on levels of employee pay using Labour Force Survey data from
1995 Q3 to 2016 Q2. The adjustment for compositional effects is obtained by combining
those estimates with changes in the composition of the labour force. Data are to 2016 Q2.
4.4 Inflation expectations
Insofar as inflation expectations affect price or wage-setting
decisions, they can also affect the outlook for inflation itself.
The MPC monitors a range of indicators to assess whether
inflation expectations remain consistent with the MPC’s
2% target.
Measures of households’ inflation expectations one year ahead
picked up slightly in 2016 Q3 (Table 4.C), and the
YouGov/Citigroup measure rose further in October. Based on
past behaviour, survey measures would be expected to
respond to actual inflation and the near-term inflation
outlook, which are both higher than in August. In contrast,
measures of longer-term expectations either fell a little or
were broadly unchanged. And most measures of both
shorter-term and longer-term expectations remained below
their past averages. It is possible that households’ inflation
expectations will remain subdued, and there remains a risk
that they settle below levels consistent with the 2% target
even as headline inflation rises further. It is also possible,
however, that a period of above-target inflation (Section 5),
following the depreciation in sterling, could be associated with
expectations rising beyond levels consistent with the inflation
target.
Companies’ expectations of inflation one year ahead also rose
in 2016 Q3 (Table 4.C). According to the Deloitte survey of
chief financial officers (CFOs) of large companies, the
dispersion of inflation expectations two years ahead around
the inflation target has narrowed since Q2. A majority of
CFOs now expect inflation to be between 1.5% and 2.5% in
two years’ time.
Measures of inflation compensation in financial markets —
which will, in part, be driven by financial market participants’
inflation expectations — have also risen (Table 4.C).
Short-term measures have picked up steadily over 2016, which
is likely to reflect expectations of higher import prices
associated with the fall in sterling being passed through to
consumer prices. Inflation compensation five to ten years
ahead has also risen since August to around past average
levels (Section 1). The average of professional forecasters’
expectations of inflation over the medium term was little
changed on the quarter and also remains in line with its past
average.
Overall, the MPC judges that inflation expectations remain
well anchored, and indicators of medium-term inflation
expectations continue to be broadly consistent with the
2% target. The MPC will continue to monitor measures of
expectations closely as inflation rises (Section 5).
Table 4.C Indicators of inflation expectations(a)
Per cent 2000 (or start Averages 2013 2014 2015 2016
of series) to 2007 since
averages(b) 2008 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4(c)
One year ahead inflation expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK/TNS(e) 2.4 3.0 3.5 2.7 2.0 1.8 2.0 2.2 n.a.
Barclays Basix(f) 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.3 1.5 n.a. 1.7 1.7 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 2.5 2.4 2.7 2.0 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.8 2.5
Companies (2008 Q2)(g) n.a. 0.5 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.7 n.a.
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(h) 2.6 2.7 3.0 2.8 2.5 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.3
Two to three year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK/TNS (2009 Q1)(e) n.a. 2.7 3.3 2.7 2.3 2.1 2.2 2.2 n.a.
Barclays Basix(f) 3.2 3.0 3.2 2.6 1.9 n.a. 2.2 2.0 n.a.
Professional forecasters
(2006 Q2)(i) 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.1
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(j) 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.0 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.4
Five to ten year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK/TNS (2009 Q1)(e) n.a. 3.2 3.6 3.1 2.8 2.9 3.4 3.0 n.a.
Barclays Basix (2008 Q3)(f) n.a. 3.7 3.8 3.6 3.1 n.a. 3.6 3.0 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 3.5 3.2 3.5 2.9 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.5 2.7
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(k) 3.0 3.4 3.5 3.4 3.3 3.2 3.1 3.1 3.5
Memo: CPI inflation 1.6 2.4 2.6 1.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.7 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Bloomberg, CBI (all rights reserved), Citigroup, GfK, ONS, TNS,
YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Dates in parentheses indicate start date of the data series.
(c) Financial markets data are averages from 3 October to 26 October 2016. YouGov/Citigroup data are for
October.
(d) The household surveys ask about expected changes in prices but do not reference a specific price index, and
the measures are based on the median estimated price change.
(e) In 2016 Q1, the survey provider changed from GfK to TNS.
(f) No data available for 2016 Q1.
(g) CBI data for the manufacturing, business/consumer services and distributive trade sectors, weighted
together using nominal shares in value added. Companies are asked about the expected percentage price
change over the coming twelve months in the markets in which they compete.
(h) Instantaneous RPI inflation one year ahead implied from swaps.
(i) Bank’s survey of external forecasters, inflation rate three years ahead.
(j) Instantaneous RPI inflation three years ahead implied from swaps.
(k) Five-year, five-year forward RPI inflation implied from swaps.
34 Inflation Report November 2016
5 Prospects for inflation
As set out in the May Inflation Report, the implications for inflation and monetary policy of the vote
to leave the European Union will depend on how demand, supply and the exchange rate adjust.
Since August, near-term activity indicators have been better than expected. Despite that, sterling
has again fallen sharply. That fall appears to have been associated with market participants’
perceptions that the United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements with the European Union might
be less open than they previously thought likely. In the projections in this Report, the MPC has
assumed that uncertainty about those arrangements remains elevated throughout the forecast
period, weighing on both demand and supply. That drag is likely to be particularly pronounced for
those firms who may be concerned that their access to EU markets could be materially reduced.
In the MPC’s best collective judgement, conditional on a path for market interest rates that reaches
0.4% by late 2019, four-quarter GDP growth is likely to slow to around 1½%. That is stronger in
the near term but weaker in the medium term than three months ago. Supply growth remains
subdued so unemployment and slack increase only modestly. While domestic cost growth rises a
little over the forecast period, imported cost pressures increase sharply due to the depreciation of
sterling. As a result, and conditional on the market path for interest rates, inflation is projected to
rise above the 2% target within the next twelve months and only begin to fall back in the second
half of the three-year forecast period.
In August, the MPC revised down significantly its projections
for demand and, to a slightly lesser extent, supply following
the vote to leave the European Union. The projection for
inflation was nonetheless revised higher, reflecting the impact
of the sharp decline in sterling following the referendum.
Those projections were published alongside the announcement
of the MPC’s August policy package — comprising a cut in
Bank Rate, a Term Funding Scheme, £60 billion of gilt
purchases and up to £10 billion of corporate bond purchases.
The immediate impact of the package on market interest rates
and asset prices was somewhat greater than anticipated in
August and it has begun to feed through to lower interest rates
for households and companies (see the box on pages 2–3).
Since the August Report, indicators of growth in the second
half of 2016 have been stronger than anticipated, but the
sterling exchange rate has declined further. The implications
of these developments for the MPC’s medium-term
projections depend on why they have occurred.
GDP grew by 0.5% in 2016 Q3 according to the preliminary
estimate, down only slightly from the upwardly revised Q2
outturn. Survey indicators suggest a modest further slowdown
in Q4 (Section 2). That is a much stronger profile for the
second half of the year than assumed in the August
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 35
projections. There are several possible reasons for this.
Underlying momentum in the economy may have been greater
than previously assumed in the run-up to the referendum. In
addition, indicators of uncertainty have fallen back, although
they are still above average levels, following their sharp rises in
the summer. And financial conditions have improved. The
housing market has also been more resilient than previously
assumed, consistent with few signs, as yet, of weakness in
household spending or consumer sentiment more generally.
That suggests consumers have not materially revised down
their view of future income prospects since the summer.
Despite positive news on the near-term outlook, the
sterling ERI fell sharply in October, and is 6½% lower than at
the time of the August Report. By itself, the lower level of
sterling would support UK activity. The fall has, however, been
attributed by market contacts to perceptions that the
United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements with the
European Union might be less open than they previously
thought likely. In its projections, the MPC has assumed that
uncertainty about those arrangements remains elevated
throughout the forecast period, weighing on both demand and
supply. That drag is likely to be particularly pronounced for
those firms who may be concerned that their access to
EU markets could be materially reduced.
Following the latest fall, sterling is around 20% below its
November 2015 peak. There is evidence that large changes in
exchange rates and those associated with changes in supply
expectations tend to pass through to consumer prices more
quickly (Section 4). Given the nature of the fall in sterling, the
MPC therefore judges that pass-through to CPI inflation will
be a little faster than usually assumed. Even so, the extent of
the depreciation means it is likely still to be contributing
significantly to inflation by the end of the MPC’s forecast
period and is the sole reason why inflation remains above the
2% target at that point.
Alongside the fall in sterling, market interest rates have risen
(see the box on pages 2–3). In the fifteen days to 26 October,
the yield curve implied a small fall in Bank Rate to just under
0.2% in the near term before rising to 0.4% by late 2019
(Table 5.A). That profile was 10 basis points higher, on
average, than the August Report path, which troughed at 0.1%
in early 2017.(1) Longer-term market interest rates — such as
(1) Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on:
Bank Rate following a path implied by market yields; the introduction of the
Term Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central bank reserves; the
stock of purchased gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaching
£435 billion and remaining there throughout the forecast period; the stock of
purchased corporate bonds financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaching
£10 billion and remaining there throughout the forecast period; the
Recommendations of the Financial Policy Committee and the current regulatory
plans of the Prudential Regulation Authority; the Government’s tax and spending
plans as set out in the March 2016 Budget; commodity prices following market
paths; and the sterling exchange rate remaining broadly flat. The main assumptions
are set out in a table at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
inflationreport/2016/novca.pdf.
Table 5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates(a)
Per cent
 2016 2017 2018 2019
 Q4(b) Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
November 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4
August 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
(a) The data are fifteen working day averages of one-day forward rates to 26 October 2016 and 27 July 2016
respectively. The curve is based on overnight index swap rates.
(b) November figure for 2016 Q4 is an average of realised overnight rates to 26 October 2016, and forward
rates thereafter.
36 Inflation Report November 2016
those on UK government debt — have risen above the levels
seen in the run-up to the August Report, unwinding falls
following the announcement of the MPC’s policy package.
That rise in rates in large part reflects a rise in inflation
compensation, to around average levels, rather than higher
real yields (Section 1). In risky asset markets, corporate bond
spreads have risen slightly, although they remain lower than
before the August Report. Equity prices remain higher, in part
reflecting the support from the lower level of sterling for
international companies and, to a lesser extent, a rise in
domestic-facing companies’ equity prices.
The MPC’s projections, summarised in Table 5.B, are
conditioned on the asset prices set out above. As in August,
they are also conditioned on the tax and benefit rates and
government spending plans set out in the March 2016 Budget.
In the MPC’s central projection four-quarter growth slows over
the next few quarters and then remains around 1½%
throughout the forecast period (Chart 5.1). The fall in sterling
supports net trade but, by raising import prices, weighs on
households’ real incomes and spending, by more than
projected in August. A sustained period of elevated
uncertainty holds back companies’ investment. The slowdown
is more drawn out than in the August projection, so
GDP growth is higher in the near term, reflecting
stronger-than-expected data outturns, and lower further out.
Supply growth remains subdued such that slack and
unemployment increase only modestly in the projection, and
domestic cost growth picks up a little, from relatively low
rates. Higher import prices, following the 20% depreciation of
sterling over the past year, however, mean that CPI inflation is
judged likely to rise above the 2% target by mid-2017, before
peaking at 2¾% a year later and then beginning to fall back in
the second half of the forecast period. Although pass-through
is a little faster than in previous projections, the depreciation
is judged likely still to be pushing inflation above the MPC’s
2% target at the three-year forecast horizon (Chart 5.2).
Ultimately, however, the impact of higher import prices
dissipates and so CPI inflation is judged likely to return to
close to the target over the following year. Inflation rises
further above the target than in August (Chart 5.3) primarily
due to the further fall in sterling.
The MPC’s Remit requires that monetary policy should
balance the speed with which inflation is returned to the
target with the support for real activity. Developments since
August, in particular the direct impact of the further
depreciation of sterling on CPI inflation, have adversely
affected that trade-off. This impact will ultimately prove
temporary, and attempting to offset it fully with tighter
monetary policy would be excessively costly in terms of
foregone output and employment growth. However, there are
limits to the extent to which above-target inflation can be
tolerated.
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
ONS data
Chart 5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations, other policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been
conditioned on the assumptions in Table 5.B footnote (b). To the left of the vertical dashed line,
the distribution reflects the likelihood of revisions to the data over the past; to the right, it
reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If economic circumstances
identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that
the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of
those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to lie within
each pair of the lighter green areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast
period, GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of
100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP growth can fall anywhere
outside the green area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the
light grey background. See the box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a
fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
Table 5.B Forecast summary(a)(b)
Projections
 2016 2017 2018 2019
GDP(c) 2.2 (2.0) 1.4 (0.8) 1.5 (1.8) 1.6
Excluding backcast 2.1 (1.8) 1.4 (0.8) 1.5 (1.8) 1.6
 2016 Q4 2017 Q4 2018 Q4 2019 Q4
CPI inflation(d) 1.3 (1.2) 2.7 (2.0) 2.7 (2.4) 2.5
LFS unemployment rate 4.9 (5.1) 5.4 (5.5) 5.6 (5.5) 5.6
Bank Rate(e) 0.2 (0.1) 0.2 (0.1) 0.3 (0.2) 0.4
(a) Modal projections for GDP, CPI inflation and LFS unemployment. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the August 2016 Inflation Report. Projections were only available to 2019 Q3
in August.
(b) The November projections have been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased gilts
reaches £435 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period; the stock of purchased corporate
bonds reaches £10 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period; and on the announced
Term Funding Scheme (TFS); all three of which are financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
The August projections were conditioned on the same asset purchase and TFS assumptions.
(c) Calendar-year growth in real GDP consistent with the modal projection for four-quarter growth in real GDP.
The MPC’s projections are based on its backcast for GDP.
(d) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(e) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on
overnight index swap rates.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 37
Those limits depend, for example, on the cause of the inflation
overshoot, the extent of second-round effects on inflation
expectations and domestic costs, and the scale of the shortfall
in economic activity below potential. In the MPC’s November
forecast, the inflation overshoot is the product of a perceived
shock to future supply, which has caused the exchange rate to
fall, alongside a modest projected shortfall of activity.
Inflation expectations have picked up to around their past
average levels and domestic costs have remained contained.
Given the projected rise in unemployment, together with the
risks around activity and inflation, and the potential for further
volatility in asset prices, the MPC judges it appropriate to
accommodate a period of above-target inflation. That
notwithstanding, the MPC is monitoring closely the evolution
of inflation expectations.
At its meeting ending on 2 November, the MPC voted to
maintain Bank Rate at 0.25% and agreed that it remained
appropriate to continue the previously announced asset
purchase programmes, financed by the issuance of central
bank reserves. The factors behind that decision are set out in
the Monetary Policy Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and
in more detail in the Minutes of the meeting.(1) The remainder
of this section sets out the MPC’s projections, and the risks
around them, in more detail.
5.1 The MPC’s key judgements and risks
Key Judgement 1: the fall in sterling supports net trade in
the face of modest global growth
The MPC’s projections continue to incorporate a small pickup
in global growth, although to below average rates (Table 5.C)
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market
interest rate expectations, other policy measures as
announced
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.3 CPI inflation projection in August based on
market interest rate expectations, other policy measures
as announced
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 depict the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. They have been conditioned on the assumptions in Table 5.B footnote (b). If economic circumstances identical to today’s
were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan charts are constructed
so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter red areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the
fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall anywhere outside the red area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the light grey
background. See the box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
(1) The Minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2016/nov.pdf.
38 Inflation Report November 2016
and with the risks to that projection remaining to the
downside. Developments over the past three months suggest
that spillovers to other economies from the UK vote to leave
the European Union have been minimal to date. Partly in light
of that, the near-term projection for euro-area growth has
been revised up a little (Chart 5.4). That projection continues
to embody modest growth, supported by policy measures.
Those measures, alongside the waning drag from past falls in
oil prices, also support a pickup in inflation from current low
levels.
In the United States, activity was a little weaker than
expected around the middle of the year. The labour market
has continued to improve, however, and wage growth, as
measured by the Employment Cost Index, has picked up.
In the central projection, GDP growth recovers during 2017,
supported by stronger productivity growth.
There has been little news on growth prospects in emerging
market economies (EMEs) over the past three months. The
MPC’s projections embody a modest slowing in Chinese
GDP growth, to around 6% a year, and some recovery in a
number of those economies that have been in recession,
including Russia and Brazil. These paths are sensitive to
domestic and global developments. In China, for example, the
growth outlook is likely to be associated with a further
expansion in credit, increasing financial vulnerabilities. More
generally, EMEs will remain sensitive to movements in global
interest rates. For example, a more pronounced tightening in
US policy rates than embodied in market prices could trigger
renewed capital outflows from EMEs.
The further 6½% fall in the sterling ERI since August is
assumed to raise export growth and lower import growth.
The fall in sterling has, however, also been associated with
changing market perceptions of the likely outcomes of
negotiations with the European Union. In light of that,
companies that may be concerned that their access to
EU markets could be materially reduced (see the box on
pages 21–22) are judged likely to make more significant
adjustments to their operations than previously assumed
(Key Judgement 2). As a result, over the three years of the
forecast period, net trade provides a similar degree of support
to growth as in August, despite the additional depreciation.
Nonetheless, the 20% fall in sterling over the past
twelve months means that net trade is judged likely to
contribute positively to growth in the first two years of the
projection, before that contribution wanes in the third year.
There is a near halving in the current account deficit over the
next three years as, in addition to improving trade flows, net
income flows benefit from the lower value of sterling.
Substantial risks remain around the outlook for trade and the
current account, particularly as details of future trading
relationships with the European Union and other countries are
Table 5.C MPC key judgements(a)(b)
Key Judgement 1: the fall in sterling supports net trade in the face of modest global
growth
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018 2019
World GDP (UK-weighted)(c) 3 2 (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼
World GDP (PPP-weighted)(d) 4 3 (3¼) 3½ (3¼) 3½ (3½) 3½
Euro-area GDP(e) 2¼ 1½ (1½) 1¾ (1¼) 1¾ (1¾) 1¼
US GDP(f) 3 1½ (2) 2¼ (2¼) 2 (2) 1¾
Key Judgement 2: heightened uncertainty weighs on investment, and productivity
growth remains below past average rates
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018 2019
Business investment to
GDP ratio(g) 9½ 9¼ (9) 9 (8¾) 9 (9¼) 9¼
Productivity(h) 2¼ 1 (¾) 1½ (1¼) 1½ (1½) 1½
Participation rate(i) 63 63¾ (63½) 63¾ (63½) 63¾ (63½) 63½
Average hours(j) 32¼ 32 (32) 31¾ (32) 31¾ (31¾) 31¾
Key Judgement 3: household spending growth slows broadly in line with real incomes
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018 2019
Credit spreads(k) ¾(l) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2
Household saving ratio(m) 8 4¾ (5¾) 4 (5) 4¼ (5½) 4
Key Judgement 4: slack weighs on domestic inflationary pressures, but higher import
prices take inflation back to the 2% target then above it for a period
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018 2019
Dollar oil prices(n) 39 51 (47) 56 (52) 57 (55) 59
UK import prices(o) ¼ 10¾ (7) 4¼ (2¼) 2 (1¾) 1¼
Unit labour costs(p) 3 2¼ (2¼) 1¾ (2) 2½ (2¼) 3
Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch Global Research (used with permission), Bank of England,
BDRC Continental SME Finance Monitor, Bloomberg, British Household Panel Survey, Department for Business,
Energy and Industrial Strategy, Eurostat, IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), ONS, US Bureau of Economic
Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) The MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts)
are underpinned by four key judgements. The mapping from the key judgements to individual variables is
not precise, but the profiles in the table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s key
judgements.
(b) Figures show calendar-year growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the August 2016 Inflation Report, which were only available to 2018.
Calculations for back data based on ONS data are shown using ONS series identifiers.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 180 countries weighted according
to their shares in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 181 countries weighted according
to their shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e) Chained-volume measure.
(f) Chained-volume measure.
(g) Calendar-year average. Chained-volume business investment as a percentage of GDP.
(h) GDP per hour worked. GDP at market prices is based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast.
(i) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population.
(j) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job.
(k) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(l) Based on the weighted average of spreads for households and large companies over 2003 and 2004
relative to the level in 2007 Q3. Data used to construct the SME spread are not available for that period.
The period is chosen as broadly representative of one where spreads were neither unusually tight nor
unusually loose.
(m) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources.
(n) Average level in Q4. Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices.
(o) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4.
(p) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at
market prices, based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation
of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 39
as yet unknown. Income flows will also be sensitive to relative
rates of return and companies’ choices about where to locate
future investments (Key Judgement 2).
Key Judgement 2: heightened uncertainty weighs on
investment, and productivity growth remains below past
average rates
In light of recent developments, in its central projection, the
MPC assumes that uncertainty rises somewhat less in the near
term than assumed in August but that it remains more
elevated further out.
Uncertainty is assumed to lead companies to scale back
UK investment projects. It is also associated with continued
weakness in commercial real estate activity. The outlook for
investment is, however, supported by relatively high rates of
return and the MPC’s policy package, which has contributed to
falls in the cost of borrowing for companies. Reflecting the
revised projection for uncertainty, business investment falls
less in the near term than projected in August but is weaker
further out (Table 5.D), only returning to its 2015 peak
towards the end of the forecast period.
The period of low investment will reduce growth in the capital
stock and therefore productivity. Uncertainty may cause
businesses to postpone some research and development
projects that would otherwise have improved productivity
(Section 3). Perceptions of a less open set of trading
arrangements, at least for a period, would also be expected to
have some negative effect on potential supply growth.(1) Any
reorientation of business models, in light of new trading
arrangements, may require a reallocation of resources towards
new sectors or markets. This is likely to dampen productivity
growth for a period, especially to the extent that there is a
reduction in activity in sectors in which the United Kingdom
currently has a particular comparative advantage.
While the implications for productivity of the transition to
new trading arrangements with the European Union are highly
uncertain, the MPC’s central judgement is that hourly
productivity growth is likely to remain below historical
average rates throughout the forecast period (Chart 5.5).
In addition, there remains uncertainty about the prospects for
productivity globally. In the United Kingdom and many other
countries, productivity has risen little since the financial crisis
and projections have been gradually marked down. It is
possible that pent-up gains begin to come through over the
forecast period, but it is also possible that productivity here
and abroad continues to disappoint.
Table 5.D Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections(a)
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018 2019
Household consumption(b) 3½ 2¾ (2½) 1¼ (1) ¾ (¾) 1¼
Business investment(c) 2½ -2 (-3¾) -1¾ (-2) 2 (4¾) 4
Housing investment(d) 3¾ 4¾ (1¼) ¼ (-4¾) 1¾ (2½) 2
Exports(e) 4½ 2¾ (2¾) 2 (-½) 1 (¼) ½
Imports(e) 6 3¼ (1¼) ¼ (-2½) -1 (-1¼) -¼
Real post-tax household income(f) 3 1¼ (2) ½ (½) 1 (1¼) 1
Employment(g) 1 1 (½) 0 (0) ¼ (¾) ½
Average weekly earnings(h) 4¼ 2½ (2¾) 2¾ (3) 3¾ (3½) 3¾
(a) These projections are produced by Bank staff for the MPC to be consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment. Figures show calendar-year growth rates
unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the August 2016
Inflation Report, which were only available to 2018.
(b) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Chained-volume measure.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending
on services associated with the sale and purchase of property.
(e) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC)
fraud.
(f) Total available household resources deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(g) Four-quarter growth rate in Q4.
(h) Four-quarter growth in Q4 in whole-economy total pay.
(1) See the box on page 29 of the August 2016 Inflation Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/aug.pdf.
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16 19
Projection at the time of the August Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in November
Percentage change on previous year
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. GDP per hour worked. GDP is at market prices and projections
are based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Projections were only available to 2018 at the
time of the August Report.
Chart 5.5 Productivity(a)
+
–
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
2002 05 08 11 14 17
Projection at the time of the August Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in November
Percentage change on previous year
Sources: Eurostat and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. Chained-volume measure. Projections were only available to
2018 at the time of the August Report.
Chart 5.4 Euro-area GDP(a)
40 Inflation Report November 2016
Key Judgement 3: household spending growth slows
broadly in line with real incomes
Uncertainty could also weigh on household spending and
activity in the housing market. The latest data, however,
suggest little, if any, impact to date (Section 2). According to
the GfK/EC survey, consumer confidence has fallen back a
little since early summer but remains firm. Although official
data for consumption in Q3 are not yet available, the output
mix of Q3 growth suggests resilient consumer spending. In
the housing market the RICS survey of estate agents suggests
that the outcome of the referendum has not had a persistently
negative effect on activity.
Developments in income are typically the single most
significant influence on household spending. Over the past
couple of years, households’ real incomes have been bolstered
by a combination of above-average employment growth, a
modest recovery in wage growth and falling prices for energy,
food and other imported goods and services. That has been
associated with robust consumption growth. Over the
forecast period, nominal income growth remains modest as
wage growth picks up (Key Judgement 4) but employment
growth slows. More significantly, higher prices for imported
items reduce households’ purchasing power by more than
assumed in August, reflecting the further fall in sterling
(Key Judgement 4). In the central projection, annual
household real income and consumer spending growth
average around 1%, well below their historical average rates
(Table 5.D). The saving ratio continues to fall in the near term
and is broadly flat from early 2017 (Chart 5.6). Any upward
impetus from a desire to increase precautionary saving in light
of continued uncertainty is judged to be broadly offset by
support from lower interest rates.
There are risks around the outlook for consumption on both
sides. In the central projection the unemployment rate rises
by nearly ¾ percentage points (Chart 5.7). Increased
concerns among households about job security could raise
precautionary saving. In the other direction, it is possible that
households will be slower to adjust spending as their
purchasing power is eroded — especially in light of supportive
credit conditions — such that the saving ratio falls more
sharply than assumed.
Weaker income prospects are also associated with a less
buoyant housing market over the forecast period than in the
recent past. The recent evidence points, however, to a less
sharp slowdown than assumed three months ago (Section 2).
The central projection incorporates a modest rise in housing
investment (Table 5.D) and growth of house prices in line with
average earnings (Table 5.E).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Unemployment rate, per cent
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been
conditioned on the assumptions in Table 5.B footnote (b). The coloured bands have the same
interpretation as in Chart 5.2, and portray 90% of the probability distribution. The calibration of
this fan chart takes account of the likely path dependency of the economy, where, for example,
it is judged that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will continue to have some effect on
unemployment in successive quarters. The fan begins in 2016 Q3, a quarter earlier than the fan
for CPI inflation. That is because Q3 is a staff projection for the unemployment rate, based in
part on data for July and August. The unemployment rate was 4.9% in the three months to
August, and is projected to be 4.9% in Q3 as a whole. A significant proportion of this
distribution lies below Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment
rate. There is therefore uncertainty about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Chart 5.7 Unemployment projection based on market
interest rate expectations, other policy measures as
announced
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16 19
Per cent
Projection at the time of the August Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in November
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources. Projections were
only available to 2018 at the time of the August Report.
Chart 5.6 Household saving ratio(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 41
Key Judgement 4: slack weighs on domestic inflationary
pressures, but higher import prices take inflation back to
the 2% target then above it for a period
CPI inflation has risen to 1% as past falls in food, energy and
other imported goods prices have begun to drop out of the
annual comparison. The speed and extent to which it rises
further in coming quarters will depend in particular on how
much and how quickly the fall in sterling feeds through the
supply chain, and on developments in domestic costs.
The fall of roughly 20% in the sterling exchange rate since
November 2015 has begun, and will continue, to raise
imported costs. Some exporters to the United Kingdom may
The Committee’s projections are underpinned by four key
judgements. Risks surround all of these, and the MPC will
monitor a broad range of variables to understand the degree
to which the risks are crystallising. The table below shows
Bank staff’s indicative near-term projections that are
consistent with the judgements in the MPC’s central view
evolving as expected.
Table 5.E Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements
Key judgement Likely developments in 2016 Q4 to 2017 Q2 if judgements evolve as expected
1: the fall in sterling supports
net trade in the face of
modest global growth
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average between ¼% and ½%.
• Annual euro-area HICP inflation to increase to above 1% around the turn of the year as past falls in oil
prices drop out of the annual calculation.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a little above ½%.
• Annual US PCE inflation to pick up in coming months as past falls in oil prices drop out of the annual
calculation, reaching 2% in the first half of 2017.
• Indicators of activity consistent with four-quarter PPP-weighted emerging market economy growth of
around 4¼%; within that, Chinese GDP growth to average around 6½%.
• Net trade contributes positively to real GDP growth.
• The current account deficit narrows to around 5% of GDP in the first half of 2017.
2: heightened uncertainty
weighs on investment, and
productivity growth remains
below past average rates
• Business investment is projected to fall by around ¾% per quarter on average, reflecting the impact of
post-referendum uncertainty.
• Quarterly growth in hourly productivity of between ¼% and ½%.
• Participation rate to fall back slightly, and then remain just below 63¾% during the first half of 2017.
• Average hours to fall by just under ½% in the year to 2017 Q2.
• Unemployment starts to rise from its current trough, reaching just over 5% by 2017 Q2.
3: household spending
growth slows broadly in line
with real incomes
• A slowing in real income growth leads quarterly consumption growth to slow gradually to around
¼% per quarter on average.
• The household savings ratio to fall by around 0.5 percentage points by mid-2017.
• Credit spreads to remain broadly flat.
• Mortgage approvals for house purchase to be around 65,000 per month, on average.
• Quarterly growth in housing investment to average 0%.
• The average of the Halifax and Nationwide price indices is expected to increase by ½% per quarter.
4: slack weighs on domestic
inflationary pressures, but
higher import prices take
inflation back to the
2% target then above it for a
period
• Weak productivity growth means that four-quarter growth in whole-economy unit labour costs reaches
just under 2% by 2017 Q2.
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to evolve in line with the conditioning assumptions set out in
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/novca.pdf.
• Domestic gas and electricity prices are unchanged in the first half of 2017.
• Four-quarter AWE growth to remain between 2¼% and 2¾% in the first half of 2017.
• Non-fuel import prices to rise by almost 9% in the year to Q2.
• Indicators of medium-term inflation expectations continue to be broadly consistent with the 2% target.
42 Inflation Report November 2016
absorb part of the change in sterling by lowering other costs or
accepting lower profits, but past evidence suggests that
around 60% of the fall in sterling is likely to be reflected in
higher UK non-energy import prices. Further rises in oil prices
since August, in both dollar and sterling terms, also add
upward pressure to import prices. Import price inflation is
therefore judged likely to pick up sharply, and to a greater
extent than assumed three months ago, primarily due to the
further depreciation (Chart 5.8). There are risks on both sides
of that path.
The rise in import costs — which represent close to a third of
the CPI basket — is expected to be passed through fully to
consumer prices over several years. For some items, such as
food, changes in import costs tend to feed through quickly to
consumer prices. For other items, pass-through is more drawn
out. Given the size of the fall in sterling, and its association
with a weaker outlook for supply, the MPC judges that
pass-through to CPI inflation will be a little quicker than
usually assumed, in line with evidence from previous episodes
(Section 4). That increases the contribution of import prices
to CPI inflation over the next 18 months and reduces it a little
further out, relative to the profile for pass-through in August.
In the central projection, the contribution of non-energy
import prices is projected to rise to over 1 percentage point in
mid-2017, falling back to 2/# percentage points at the end of
2019 and to zero over the following year or so. The risks to
that outlook remain skewed to the upside in the first year. It is
possible that the impact on the CPI could be more pervasive,
with the prices of domestically produced goods and services
that compete with imports rising faster too.
In contrast to imported pressures, domestic cost pressures
remain subdued. In particular, wage growth is still well below
pre-crisis average rates, despite unemployment falling back to
around its pre-crisis level over recent years. For the most part,
that weakness reflects developments in productivity. Even
adjusting for that, however, and despite some pickup recently,
companies’ unit labour costs have been growing at rates below
those consistent with meeting the inflation target in the
medium term. In the MPC’s central projection, wage
(Table 5.D) and unit labour cost growth rise gradually
(Table 5.C) as the impact of past falls in unemployment feed
through and inflation picks up.
There are two-sided risks around the outlook for labour costs.
On the downside, the weakness in wage growth could indicate
more domestic slack. Bank staff estimate that the equilibrium
rate of unemployment — that consistent with neither upward
nor downward pressure on wage growth — is around 5%, close
to the current LFS rate. If the equilibrium rate were in fact
lower, unemployment would exert more downward pressure
on wage growth throughout the forecast period. On the
upside, the recent weakness in wage growth could indicate
greater sensitivity to current inflation than assumed. In that
+– 0
1
2
3
4
2.0 1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
Probability density, per cent(b)
November
August
(a) Chart 5.9 represents the cross-section of the GDP growth fan chart in 2018 Q4 for the
market interest rate projection. The grey outline represents the corresponding cross-section
of the August 2016 Inflation Report fan chart for the market interest rate projection. The
projections have been conditioned on the assumptions in Table 5.B footnote (b). The
coloured bands in Chart 5.9 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like
the fan charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
growth being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given growth rate, specified to
one decimal place.
Chart 5.9 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in
2018 Q4 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
Table 5.F Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths(a)
 Mode Median Mean
2016(b) 2.2 (2.0) 2.2 (2.0) 2.2 (1.9)
2017 1.4(0.8) 1.4(0.8) 1.4 (0.7)
2018 1.5 (1.8) 1.5 (1.7) 1.5 (1.7)
2019 1.6 1.6 1.6
(a) The table shows the projections for calendar-year growth of real GDP consistent with the modal, median
and mean projections for four-quarter growth of real GDP implied by the fan chart. Where growth rates
depend in part on the MPC’s backcast, revisions to quarterly growth are assumed to be independent of the
revisions to previous quarters. The figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the
August 2016 Inflation Report, which were only available to 2018. The projections have been conditioned on
the assumptions in Table 5.B footnote (b).
(b) The anticipated revisions to recent estimates of quarterly GDP growth have implications for calendar-year
growth in 2016. Without the anticipated revisions to past GDP growth, the modal path of the Committee’s
November projections would imply calendar-year growth of 2.1% in 2016 rather than 2.2%.
+
–
10
5
0
5
10
15
20 Percentage change on a year earlier
Projection at the time of the August Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in November
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16 19
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Projections are four-quarter inflation rate in Q4. Excludes the impact of MTIC fraud.
Projections were only available to 2018 at the time of the August Report.
Chart 5.8 Import price inflation(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 43
case, the prospective period of above-target inflation could
have a greater upward impact on wages.
More generally, the projections assume that inflation
expectations remain well anchored. Survey indicators of
household inflation expectations remain around or below
average at longer horizons (Section 4). Medium-term financial
market measures of inflation compensation are around their
averages, having risen sharply over the past month or so. With
inflation further above the target than in August throughout
the forecast period, it will be important to monitor medium to
long-term inflation expectations closely for any signs of
upward drift. Any substantial drift up could lead to changes in
domestic wage and price-setting behaviour, which would
make it harder to return inflation to the 2% target in the
medium term.
5.2 The projections for demand,
unemployment and inflation
Based on these judgements and the risks around them, and
conditioned on the path for Bank Rate based on market yields,
four-quarter GDP growth is projected to slow in the near term
and remain around 1½% further out. The lower sterling
exchange rate supports net trade but, acting against that,
companies begin to adjust activity in light of anticipated
changes to future trading relationships. Uncertainty about the
nature of those relationships holds back business investment,
which falls in the near term and recovers only modestly
further out. That weighs on productivity growth, as do
adjustments to production processes, and it remains below
historical average rates. Households’ spending grows at a
slower rate than recently, as their purchasing power is eroded
by the fall in sterling, and unemployment rises, reaching just
over 5½% by the end of the forecast period (Chart 5.7).
Near-term growth is stronger than in August, reflecting upside
news in the data (Table 5.F). The medium-term projection is
lower (Chart 5.9), reflecting slower real income growth, a
more persistent drag from uncertainty and the likelihood of
more significant adjustments to activity by companies in some
sectors. That change in the pattern of growth reflects a more
drawn out adjustment than in August, with the level of output
only slightly lower at the three-year horizon. As in August,
uncertainty around the outlook is greater than usual, and the
fan around the growth projection remains wider than in May,
but the risks are judged to be balanced, rather than tilted to
the downside.
Conditional on a path for Bank Rate that reaches 0.4% by
late 2019, domestic inflationary pressures build to levels
typically consistent with inflation at the target. The lower
level of sterling is, however, assumed to raise import and, in
turn, consumer prices. Although the exchange rate’s impact
on inflation is temporary, it is likely to contribute significantly
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2016 17 18
Probability of inflation at or below
the target, inverted (per cent)
Probability of inflation
above the target (per cent)
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
19
November
August
Chart 5.10 Inflation probabilities relative to the target
The November and August swathes in this chart are derived from the same distributions as
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 respectively. They indicate the assessed probability of inflation relative to
the target in each quarter of the forecast period. The 5 percentage points width of the swathes
reflects the fact that there is uncertainty about the precise probability in any given quarter, but
they should not be interpreted as confidence intervals.
0
1
2
3
4
November
August
1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 – + 4.0 5.0 6.0
Probability density, per cent(b)
(a) Chart 5.11 represents the cross-section of the CPI inflation fan chart in 2018 Q4 for the
market interest rate projection. The grey outline represents the corresponding cross-section
of the August 2016 Inflation Report fan chart for the market interest rate projection. The
projections have been conditioned on the assumptions in Table 5.B footnote (b). The
coloured bands in Chart 5.11 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts.
Like the fan charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
inflation being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given inflation rate, specified to
one decimal place.
Chart 5.11 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in
2018 Q4 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
Table 5.G Q4 CPI inflation
 Mode Median Mean
2016 Q4 1.3 (1.2) 1.3 (1.3) 1.3 (1.3)
2017 Q4 2.7 (2.0) 2.8 (2.0) 2.8 (2.1)
2018 Q4 2.7 (2.4) 2.7 (2.4) 2.7 (2.4)
2019 Q4 2.5 2.5 2.5
The table shows projections for Q4 four-quarter CPI inflation. The figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the August 2016 Inflation Report, which were only available to 2018. The
projections have been conditioned on the assumptions in Table 5.B footnote (b).
44 Inflation Report November 2016
to inflation for several years. Inflation is therefore judged
likely to rise sharply above the target over the next
twelve months and still to exceed the MPC’s 2% target at the
three-year forecast horizon, before falling back to the target
beyond then. It is possible that pass-through of higher import
prices will occur more rapidly than in the central projection, so
the risks are skewed to the upside in the near term
(Table 5.G). Taking the risks and the central projection
together, inflation is judged significantly more likely to be
above the 2% target than below it in two to three years’ time
(Chart 5.10). Inflation rises further above the target than in
August (Chart 5.11) given the further depreciation, together
with higher oil prices, but peaks sooner given the assumption
of faster pass-through.
Charts 5.12 and 5.13 show the MPC’s projections under the
alternative constant rate assumption, and the policy package
announced by the MPC. That assumption is that Bank Rate
remains at 0.25% throughout the three years of the forecast
period, before rising towards the market path over the
subsequent three years. Under that path, the outlooks for
GDP growth and CPI inflation are broadly similar to those
under the market path.
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
ONS data +
–
See footnote to Chart 5.1.
Chart 5.12 GDP projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.25%, other policy measures as
announced
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.13 CPI inflation projection based on constant
nominal interest rates at 0.25%, other policy measures
as announced
See footnote to Chart 5.2.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 45
Other forecasters’ expectations
This box reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey
of external forecasters, carried out in October.(1) On average,
respondents expected four-quarter GDP growth to slow
materially over the coming year, before picking up further out
(Table 1). Relative to August, the range of forecasts for
GDP growth one year ahead has narrowed, but has widened
for forecasts three years ahead (Chart A). Respondents, on
average, expected the unemployment rate to increase over
the next two years, albeit to a lesser extent than projected
in August.
The average of respondents’ central expectations for
CPI inflation in three years’ time remained stable at 2.1%
(Chart B). Average expectations in one year’s time, however,
continued to increase to 2.6%. Sterling was projected, on
average, to be around 4% higher than the conditioning path
underlying the MPC’s forecast (Table 1).
The path for Bank Rate implied by the average of external
forecasters’ central expectations was little changed from at the
time of the August Report and broadly similar to the market
path. The stock of gilt purchases was, on average, expected to
be higher than the £435 billion announced in August (Table 1),
with a 44% weight placed on the stock being £475 billion or
higher in three years’ time (Chart C). Respondents also placed
a 33% weight on the stock of corporate bonds being £15 billion
or higher in three years’ time, compared with the £10 billion
announced in August.
(1) For detailed distributions of other forecasters’ expectations, see ‘Other forecasters’
expectations’ on the Bank’s website, available at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/novofe.pdf.
Table 1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections(a)
 2017 Q4 2018 Q4 2019 Q4
CPI inflation(b) 2.6 2.5 2.1
GDP growth(c) 0.9 1.6 1.9
LFS unemployment rate 5.6 5.8 5.8
Bank Rate (per cent) 0.2 0.2 0.4
Stock of purchased gilts (£ billions)(d) 466 469 475
Stock of purchased corporate bonds
(£ billions)(d) 11 12 13
Sterling ERI 76.2 77.7 77.1
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 24 October 2016.
(a) For 2017 Q4, there were 22 forecasts for CPI inflation, GDP growth and Bank Rate, 20 for the
unemployment rate, 18 for the stock of gilt purchases, 13 for the stock of corporate bond purchases and
10 for the sterling ERI. For 2018 Q4, there were 19 forecasts for CPI inflation and GDP growth, 20 for
Bank Rate, 17 for the unemployment rate and the stock of gilt purchases, 13 for the stock of corporate bond
purchases and 9 for the sterling ERI. For 2019 Q4, there were 18 forecasts for CPI inflation, GDP growth,
and Bank Rate, 17 for the unemployment rate, 16 for the stock of gilt purchases, 12 for the stock of
corporate bond purchases and 8 for the sterling ERI.
(b) Twelve-month rate.
(c) Four-quarter percentage change.
(d) Original purchase value. Purchased via the creation of central bank reserves.
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
One year ahead Two years ahead Three years ahead
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
August Report November Report
Average
Interquartile range
Range
Sources: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports in August and
November 2016.
Chart A The range of GDP forecasts three years ahead
has widened
Forecasters’ central projections of GDP growth
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Three years
 ahead
One year ahead
Percentage increases on a year earlier
Sources: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports from February 2008 to
November 2016.
Chart B External forecasters expect inflation to be close
to the 2% target in three years’ time
Forecasters’ central projections of CPI inflation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
<375 375–425 425–475 475–525 >525
One year ahead
Two years ahead
Three years ahead
Probability, per cent
Stock of gilt purchases (£ billions)
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 24 October 2016.
(a) Outcomes on the boundary of these ranges are included in the upper range. For example,
the stock being £475 billion is in the £475 billion to £525 billion range.
Chart C External forecasters are placing a large weight
on a further increase in gilt purchases
Average of forecasters’ probability distributions for the stock of
gilt purchases(a)
46 Inflation Report November 2016
Index of charts and tables
Charts
1 Financial markets and global economic developments 1
1.1 Spot yields on UK gilts at selected maturities 1
1.2 Sterling exchange rates 1
1.3 International forward interest rates 3
1.4 Five-year, five-year forward nominal interest rates 4
1.5 Five-year, five-year forward inflation compensation 4
1.6 Non-financial corporate bond spreads 4
1.7 International equity prices 5
1.8 The FTSE All-Share index relative to the equity prices of
UK domestically focused companies and the sterling ERI 6
1.9 UK banks’ indicative longer-term funding spreads 6
1.10 Contributions to quarterly US GDP growth 10
1.11 EME bank lending conditions 10
1.12 US dollar oil and commodity prices 11
1.13 Four-quarter growth in global oil supply and demand 11
Explaining the long-term decline in interest rates 8
A Five-year, five-year forward nominal interest rates 8
B Shifts in desired saving and investment: an illustration 8
2 Demand and output 12
2.1 Output growth and Bank staff’s near-term projection 12
2.2 Contributions to average quarterly GVA growth
by output sector 13
2.3 Survey indicators of expected output growth 13
2.4 Range of uncertainty measures 16
2.5 Business investment and survey measures of
investment intentions 17
2.6 Measures of consumer confidence and unemployment
expectations 19
2.7 Mortgage approvals for house purchase and housing
transactions 20
2.8 Survey measures of goods exports 20
2.9 UK current account 22
Defined-benefit pension fund deficits and the real economy 14
A Fifteen-year government bond yield and the balance
on UK defined-benefit pension funds as a proportion
of total assets 14
B Equity prices: FTSE All-Share and companies with
pension deficits 15
C Agents’ survey: factors influencing firms’ investment
decisions 15
The housing market and household spending 18
A Estimates of the contribution to consumption
through the collateral channel 18
Net trade and the exchange rate 21
A Sterling exchange rate and measures of trade prices 21
B Trade balances by sector 22
3 Supply and the labour market 23
3.1 Survey indicators of employment intentions 23
3.2 Vacancies and flow from unemployment to
employment 24
3.3 Job losses and survey indicators of expected job losses 25
3.4 Unemployment rate and Bank staff’s near-term
projection 25
3.5 Unemployment rates by duration 25
3.6 Survey indicators of capacity utilisation 26
3.7 Labour force participation rate 26
3.8 Average weekly hours worked: actual and usual 27
3.9 Contributions to four-quarter hourly labour
productivity growth 27
4 Costs and prices 28
4.1 CPI inflation and Bank staff’s near-term projection 28
4.2 Contributions to CPI inflation 29
4.3 Estimated contributions to four-quarter growth in
unit costs for consumer goods and services 30
4.4 Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices 30
4.5 UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel 30
4.6 Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI) 31
4.7 Estimated margins on consumer goods and services 31
4.8 Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy
unit labour cost growth 32
4.9 Whole-economy total pay 33
5 Prospects for inflation 34
5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations, other policy measures as announced 36
5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate
expectations, other policy measures as announced 37
5.3 CPI inflation projection in August based on market
interest rate expectations, other policy measures as
announced 37
5.4 Euro-area GDP 39
5.5 Productivity 39
5.6 Household saving ratio 40
5.7 Unemployment projection based on market interest
rate expectations, other policy measures as announced 40
5.8 Import price inflation 42
5.9 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in 2018 Q4
(central 90% of the distribution) 42
5.10 Inflation probabilities relative to the target 43
5.11 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in 2018 Q4
(central 90% of the distribution) 43
5.12 GDP projection based on constant nominal interest
rates at 0.25%, other policy measures as announced 44
5.13 CPI inflation projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.25%, other policy measures as
announced 44
Other forecasters’ expectations 45
A Forecasters’ central projections of GDP growth 45
B Forecasters’ central projections of CPI inflation 45
C Average of forecasters’ probability distributions for
the stock of gilt purchases 45
 Index of charts and tables 47
Tables
1 Financial markets and global economic developments 1
1.A GDP in selected countries and regions 7
1.B Selected euro-area indicators 7
1.C Inflation in selected countries and regions 10
1.D Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 11
Developments in UK financial conditions since the
August Report 2
1 Financial market indicators 2
2 Retail deposit and lending interest rates 3
2 Demand and output 12
2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 12
2.B Expenditure components of demand 16
2.C Net external finance raised by private non-financial
corporations 17
2.D Household income, consumption and saving 17
3 Supply and the labour market 23
3.A Change in employment, and survey indicators of
recruitment difficulties 24
3.B Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 24
3.C CIPD survey on companies’ expectations of the
effect of the referendum on business 26
4 Costs and prices 28
4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 29
4.B Indicators of annual wage growth 32
4.C Indicators of inflation expectations 33
5 Prospects for inflation 34
5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates 35
5.B Forecast summary 36
5.C MPC key judgements 38
5.D Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections 39
5.E Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements 41
5.F Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths 42
5.G Q4 CPI inflation 43
Other forecasters’ expectations 45
1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections 45
48 Inflation Report November 2016
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CDS – credit default swap.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices
index.
DGI – domestically generated inflation.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
Libor – London interbank offered rate.
M4 – UK non-bank, non-building society private sector’s
holdings of sterling notes and coin, and their sterling deposits
(including certificates of deposit, holdings of commercial
paper and other short-term instruments and claims arising
from repos) held at UK banks and building societies.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
RPI – retail prices index.
RPI inflation – inflation measured by the retail prices index.
Abbreviations
BCC – British Chambers of Commerce.
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CBPS – Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme.
CEIC – CEIC Data Company Ltd.
CFO – chief financial officer.
CIPD – Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development.
CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
CRE – commercial real estate.
EBITDA – earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and
amortisation.
EC – European Commission.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EME – emerging market economy.
EU – European Union.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FPC – Financial Policy Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
GVA – gross value added.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MSCI – Morgan Stanley Capital International Inc.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
NLW – National Living Wage.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
OPEC – Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
PwC – PricewaterhouseCoopers.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
RICS – Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SMEs – small and medium-sized enterprises.
TFP – total factor productivity.
TFS – Term Funding Scheme.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Symbols and conventions
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in
charts and tables is the Bank of England or the Office for
National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from financial
markets data, are seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may
sometimes differ from the total shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first
observation within the relevant period, eg data for the first
quarter of the year.
Glossary and other information

© Bank of England 2016
ISSN 1353-6737
Printed by Park Communications Limited