Inflation Report
August 2015

BANK OF ENGLAND
Inflation Report
August 2015
In order to maintain price stability, the Government has set the Bank’s Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) a target for the annual inflation rate of the Consumer Prices Index of 2%.
Subject to that, the MPC is also required to support the Government’s economic policy,
including its objectives for growth and employment.
The Inflation Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of
the Monetary Policy Committee. It serves two purposes. First, its preparation provides a
comprehensive and forward-looking framework for discussion among MPC members as an aid
to our decision-making. Second, its publication allows us to share our thinking and explain the
reasons for our decisions to those whom they affect.
Although not every member will agree with every assumption on which our projections are
based, the fan charts represent the MPC’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths
for inflation, output and unemployment, as well as the uncertainties surrounding those central
projections.
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998.
The Monetary Policy Committee:
Mark Carney, Governor
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy
Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability
Nemat Shafik, Deputy Governor responsible for markets and banking
Kristin Forbes
Andrew Haldane
Ian McCafferty
David Miles
Martin Weale
The Inflation Report is available in PDF alongside PowerPoint‰ versions of the charts and
Excel spreadsheets of the data underlying most of them at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/2015/aug.aspx.

 Monetary policy summary i
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.1 Global economic developments 1
1.2 Monetary policy 5
1.3 Developments in other financial markets 6
Box Monetary policy since the May Report 9
2 Demand and output 10
2.1 Final demand 10
2.2 Provision of goods and services 15
Box The fiscal consolidation 16
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.1 Labour market developments and slack 19
3.2 Productivity and capacity utilisation 22
3.3 Wages 23
Box The impact of the National Living Wage 24
4 Costs and prices 25
4.1 Consumer prices 25
4.2 Developments in the prices of traded goods and services 26
4.3 Supply chain pressures 29
4.4 Inflation expectations 31
Box Measures of underlying inflation 28
5 Prospects for inflation 32
5.1 Key judgements and risks 34
5.2 The projections for demand, unemployment and inflation 40
Box Other forecasters’ expectations 42
Index of charts and tables 43
Press Notices 45
Glossary and other information 46
Contents

 Monetary policy summary i
Monetary policy summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy in order to
meet the 2% inflation target and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At
its meeting ending on 5 August 2015, the MPC voted by a majority of 8–1 to maintain
Bank Rate at 0.5%. The Committee voted unanimously to maintain the stock of purchased
assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves at £375 billion, and so to reinvest the
£16.9 billion of cash flows associated with the redemption of the September 2015 gilt held in
the Asset Purchase Facility.
CPI inflation fell back to zero in June. As set out in the Governor’s open letter to the Chancellor, around three quarters of
the deviation of inflation from the 2% target, or 1½ percentage points, reflects unusually low contributions from energy,
food, and other imported goods prices. The remaining quarter of the deviation of inflation from target, or ½ a
percentage point, reflects the past weakness of domestic cost growth, and unit labour costs in particular. The combined
weakness in domestic costs and imported goods prices is evident in subdued core inflation, which on most measures is
currently around 1% (Section 4).
With some underutilised resources remaining in the economy and with inflation below the target, the Committee
intends to set monetary policy in order to ensure that growth is sufficient to absorb the remaining economic slack so as
to return inflation to the target within two years. Conditional upon Bank Rate following the gently rising path implied by
market yields, the Committee judges that this is likely to be achieved.
In its latest economic projections, the Committee projects UK-weighted world demand to expand at a moderate pace
(Section 1). Growth in advanced economies is expected to be a touch faster, and growth in emerging economies a little
slower, than in the past few years. The support to UK exports from steady global demand growth is expected to be
counterbalanced, however, by the effect of the past appreciation of sterling. Risks to global growth are judged to be
skewed moderately to the downside reflecting, for example, risks to activity in the euro area and China.
Private domestic demand growth in the United Kingdom is expected to remain robust (Section 2). Household spending
has been supported by the boost to real incomes from lower food and energy prices. Wage growth has picked up as the
labour market has tightened and productivity has strengthened. Business and consumer confidence remain high, while
credit conditions have continued to improve, with historically low mortgage rates providing support to activity in the
housing market. Business investment has made a substantial contribution to growth in recent years. Firms have invested
to expand capacity, supported by accommodative financial conditions. Despite weakening slightly, surveys suggest
continued robust investment growth ahead. This will support the continuing increase of underlying productivity growth
towards past average rates.
Robust private domestic demand is expected to produce sufficient momentum to eliminate the margin of spare capacity
over the next year or so, despite the continuing fiscal consolidation and modest global growth. This is judged likely to
generate the rise in domestic costs expected to be necessary to return inflation to the target in the medium term.
The near-term outlook for inflation is muted (Section 4). The falls in energy prices of the past few months will continue
to bear down on inflation at least until the middle of next year. Nonetheless, a range of measures suggest that
medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. There is little evidence in wage settlements or spending
patterns of any deflationary mindset among businesses and households.
ii Inflation Report August 2015
Sterling has appreciated by 3½% since May and 20% since its trough in March 2013. The drag on import prices from this
appreciation will continue to push down on inflation for some time to come, posing a downside risk to its path in the
near term. Set against that, the degree of slack in the economy has diminished substantially over the past two and a half
years. The unemployment rate has fallen by more than 2 percentage points since the middle of 2013, and the ratio of job
vacancies to unemployment has returned from well below to around its pre-crisis average. The margin of spare capacity
is currently judged to be around ½% of GDP, with a range of views among MPC members around that central estimate.
A further modest tightening of the labour market is expected, supporting a continued firming in the growth of wages and
unit labour costs over the next three years, counterbalancing the drag on inflation from sterling.
Were Bank Rate to follow the gently rising path implied by market yields, the Committee judges that demand growth
would be sufficient to return inflation to the target within two years. In its projections, inflation then moves slightly
above the target in the third year of the forecast period as sustained growth leads to a degree of excess demand.
Underlying those projections are significant judgements in a number of areas (Section 5). In any one of these areas,
developments might easily turn out differently than assumed with implications for the outlook for growth and inflation,
and therefore for the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Reflecting that, there is a spread of views among
MPC members about the balance of risks to inflation relative to the best collective judgement presented in Section 5.
At the Committee’s meeting ending on 5 August, the majority of MPC members judged it appropriate to leave the stance
of monetary policy unchanged at present. Ian McCafferty preferred to increase Bank Rate by 25 basis points, given his
view that demand growth and wage pressures were likely to be greater, and the margin of spare capacity smaller, than
embodied in the Committee’s collective August projections.
All members agree that, given the likely persistence of the headwinds weighing on the economy, when Bank Rate does
begin to rise, it is expected to do so more gradually and to a lower level than in recent cycles. This guidance is an
expectation, not a promise. The actual path Bank Rate will follow over the next few years will depend on the economic
circumstances. The Committee will continue to monitor closely the incoming data.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 1
International economic and financial developments play a key
role in shaping UK economic conditions. Global demand and
cost pressures (Section 1.1) directly affect the quantities and
prices of UK exports and imports. UK asset prices and the
exchange rate are heavily influenced by developments in other
advanced economies. Events abroad can also influence
UK households’ and businesses’ uncertainty around the
economic outlook, and therefore their spending decisions.
Since the spring, the market-implied paths for policy rates in
the United Kingdom, United States and the euro area have
steepened (Section 1.2); long-term interest rates are also
higher (Chart 1.1). These developments are likely in part to
reflect reduced perceptions of downside risks to global growth
and inflation. There were some fluctuations in asset prices in
July (Section 1.3), particularly in the euro area, which are likely
to have reflected uncertainty surrounding negotiations
between Greece and its creditors. The sterling exchange rate
index (ERI) has appreciated by 3½% since the run-up to the
May Report.
1.1 Global economic developments
UK-weighted world GDP growth slowed to 0.4% in 2015 Q1,
slightly lower than had been expected in the May Report. That
slowing was associated with a moderation in UK-weighted
world trade growth (Chart 1.2), which in turn is likely to have
weighed on UK export growth (Section 2).
The reasons for the global slowing are unclear, with the
pattern of growth mixed across countries. US output growth
was subdued in Q1, and emerging-economy growth continued
to slow. In contrast, growth in the euro area was broadly flat
on the quarter, and Japanese GDP growth rose sharply
(Table 1.B). Partly reflecting a modest rebound in US output
growth, UK-weighted world GDP growth probably picked up in
Q2 to around 0.6%. Further out, growth is projected to
remain solid, supported by policy stimulus and the boost to
1 Global economic and financial
developments
UK-weighted world GDP growth slowed in Q1, but is likely to have risen in Q2. Further ahead,
global growth is expected to be slightly weaker than projected in May, reflecting developments in
Greece and China. Dollar oil prices have fallen by 12% since the May Report. Financial market
prices implied a slightly faster pace of Bank Rate rises than in May, although the pace of increases
remains gradual. UK long-term interest rates also rose, along with those in other advanced
economies. The sterling ERI rose further.
May Report
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Per cent
United States
Euro area(b)
United Kingdom
Chart 1.1 Long-term interest rates have risen since
late April
International ten-year government bond yields(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon yields on ten-year benchmark government bonds.
(b) An estimate based on French and German government bonds.
Table 1.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in May Developments since May
Advanced economies Broadly on track
• Average quarterly euro-area growth of
around ½%; inflation to pick up slowly
but remain low.
• Average quarterly US GDP growth of a
little below ¾%; non-farm payrolls to
increase by around 250,000 a month.
• Euro-area GDP rose by 0.4% in Q1.
Headline inflation was 0.2% in July,
according to the flash estimate.
• US GDP rose by 0.6% in Q2. Non-farm
payrolls rose by a monthly average of
around 220,000 in Q2.
Rest of the world Broadly on track
• Average four-quarter PPP-weighted
emerging-economy growth of around
4¼% on average; Chinese GDP growth to
average a little below 7%.
• Emerging-economy GDP growth was
4.3% in Q1. Chinese GDP growth was
7.0% in Q2.
The exchange rate and commodity prices Oil prices lower; sterling higher
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to
evolve in line with the conditioning
assumptions.
• US dollar oil prices are around 12%
lower. Sterling appreciated by 3½%.
2 Inflation Report August 2015
the real incomes of oil consumers from lower oil prices
(Section 5). But the projection is slightly weaker than in May,
reflecting developments in Greece and China.
Euro area
Economic conditions in the euro area have improved following
several years of sluggish growth. GDP rose by 0.4% in Q1, as
expected in May. Activity indicators, such as the PMI surveys,
suggest a similar pace of growth in Q2. The pickup in
euro-area GDP growth has been underpinned by household
consumption, which has risen broadly in line with real
incomes. That is likely to reflect, in part, the boost from lower
oil prices.
Inflation has been low, largely reflecting the fall in oil prices,
although it ticked up in Q2 (Table 1.C). Inflation is expected
to remain subdued before beginning to rise towards the end of
the year, as the effects of the oil price fall begin to drop out of
the annual rate. Core inflation — which excludes food and
energy — also rose a little, but remains subdued. That is
likely to reflect significant spare capacity in the region:
unemployment rates remain elevated, particularly in periphery
countries.
The outlook for the remainder of the year is uncertain, and is
likely to be sensitive to developments in Greece. Negotiations
between the Greek government and its creditors stalled in late
June, after which capital controls were imposed in Greece.
Talks over a new programme are now under way. But the
imposition of capital controls, together with the further
economic adjustment that is required in coming years, is likely
to weigh significantly on economic activity in Greece over the
forecast period (Section 5).
The broader financial market reaction to events in Greece has
been limited and much smaller than in 2011–12, when market
concerns about sovereign debt positions intensified sharply
(Section 1.3). That limited effect is likely to reflect market
participants’ confidence in the ability of policymakers either to
bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion, or to limit
the contagion to other economies. Some timely activity
indicators, such as the PMIs and consumer confidence
(Chart 1.3), softened slightly in July. That could reflect the
impact of uncertainty around Greek debt negotiations on
broader euro-area sentiment; but this impact is expected to
unwind, particularly if negotiations proceed relatively
smoothly.
Overall, Bank staff expect euro-area growth to continue to
recover gradually, supported by European Central Bank (ECB)
asset purchases, the boost from lower oil prices and further
improvements in credit conditions. But growth is nonetheless
expected to be slightly weaker than projected in May, largely
on account of downward revisions to activity in Greece.
Although Greek debt negotiations have now resumed,
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2007 09 11 13 15
Percentage change on
a quarter earlier
UK-weighted world GDP
 (right-hand scale)
UK-weighted world trade
 (left-hand scale)
Percentage change on
a quarter earlier
+
–
+
–
Chart 1.2 World GDP growth slowed in Q1 but is likely
to have picked up in Q2
UK-weighted world GDP and world trade(a)
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update July 2015, OECD, Thomson Reuters
Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Constructed using data for real GDP growth rates and import volumes of 146 countries
weighted according to their shares in UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the
latest observation is 2015 Q1. For those countries where data for 2015 Q1 are not yet
available, data are assumed to be consistent with projections in the IMF WEO Update
July 2015. The diamonds show Bank staff’s projections for 2015 Q2.
Table 1.B Mixed pattern of GDP growth across countries in Q1
GDP in selected countries and regions(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier, annualised
 Averages 2015
 1998–2007 2012 2013 2014 H1 2014 H2 Q1 Q2
United Kingdom 3.0 0.4 2.4 3.6 3.1 1.5 2.8
Euro area (39%) 2.3 -0.9 0.5 0.7 1.1 1.5 n.a.
United States (18%) 3.0 1.3 2.5 1.8 3.2 0.6 2.3
China (3%)(b) 10.0 7.7 7.7 7.5 7.3 7.0 7.0
Japan (2%) 1.1 0.0 2.3 -1.2 -0.4 3.9 n.a.
UK-weighted world GDP(c) 3.0 1.1 2.1 1.9 2.3 1.8 n.a.
Sources: Eurostat, IMF WEO Update July 2015, Japanese Cabinet Office, National Bureau of Statistics of China,
ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) Real GDP measures. Figures in parentheses are shares in UK goods and services exports in 2013 from the
2014 Pink Book.
(b) Chinese data are four-quarter growth. The earliest observation for China is 2000 Q1.
(c) Constructed as in Chart 1.2, footnote (a).
Table 1.C Inflation rates are low across countries
Inflation rates in selected countries and regions
Percentage changes on a year earlier
 Monthly averages 2015
 1998–2007 2014 2015 Q1 April May June July
Headline consumer price inflation
United Kingdom 1.6 1.5 0.1 -0.1 0.1 0.0 n.a.
Euro area(a) 2.0 0.4 -0.3 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.2
United States(b) 2.0 1.4 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 n.a.
UK-weighted world CPI
(c) 2.0 1.0 0.1 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Core consumer price inflation(d)
United Kingdom 1.2 1.6 1.2 0.8 0.9 0.8 n.a.
Euro area(a) 1.6 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.8 1.0
United States(b) 1.8 1.5 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 n.a.
Sources: Eurostat, IMF WEO Update July 2015, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream, US Bureau of Economic
Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) Data point for July 2015 is a flash estimate.
(b) Personal consumption expenditure price index inflation. Data point for June 2015 is a preliminary estimate.
(c) Constructed using data for inflation rates of 51 countries weighted according to their shares in UK exports.
For the vast majority of countries, the latest observation is 2015 Q1. For those countries where data for
2015 Q1 are not yet available, data are assumed to be consistent with projections in the IMF WEO Update
July 2015.
(d) For the euro area and the United Kingdom, excludes energy, food, alcoholic beverages and tobacco. For the
United States, excludes food and energy.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 3
agreeing and implementing a sustainable solution will be
challenging, and a disorderly outcome cannot be ruled out
(Section 5). More generally, countries continue to face the
challenges of improving competitiveness and reducing debt
positions at a time when nominal income growth remains
relatively subdued.
United States
Quarterly GDP growth in the United States recovered to 0.6%
in Q2, following upwardly revised growth of 0.2% in Q1. In
part, the pickup in Q2 reflected an unwinding of erratic
factors, such as severe winter weather, that had depressed
growth in Q1. Following weakness in Q1, household
consumption growth was firmer in Q2, as some of the boost
to real incomes from lower oil prices appears to have
supported spending.
The labour market recovery continued: employment rose
solidly in Q2, albeit slightly less than expected in May
(Table 1.A). And the unemployment rate fell to 5.3% in June
(Chart 1.4), only just above the Federal Open Market
Committee’s (FOMC’s) central tendency of estimates of the
unemployment rate in the longer run of 5.0% to 5.2%. This
continued labour market tightening has, over the past year,
been associated with some pickup in wage growth, following
several years of sluggish growth. Inflation appears likely to
rise from its current low level (Table 1.C), reflecting both that
recovery in wage growth and the effects of the fall in oil prices
starting to drop out of the annual rate. Financial market prices
imply a rise in the federal funds rate around the turn of the
year (Section 1.2).
Labour productivity is likely to have risen slightly in Q2,
following a contraction in Q1. Bank staff project a continued
recovery in productivity, which should support wage and
consumption growth over the forecast period. The 20% rise in
the dollar ERI over the past year, however, is expected to drag
on growth. Overall, GDP growth is projected to be slightly
below its historical average rate over the rest of 2015
(Section 5).
Rest of the world
In Japan, GDP rose by 1% in Q1, much stronger than had been
anticipated in the May Report. In part, that reflected robust
business investment, but some of the strength reflected a rise
in inventories, which is likely to unwind. The labour market
has tightened over the past year and the unemployment rate
was 3.4% in June.
In China, GDP growth has moderated in recent years, from
pre-crisis rates of around 10%, partly reflecting the
authorities’ efforts to rebalance the economy towards
household consumption. Annual GDP growth was 7.0% in Q2,
unchanged from Q1 and slightly higher than expected in the
May Report (Table 1.B). Monthly indicators such as retail sales
0
2
4
6
0
4
8
12 Percentage change on a year earlier Per cent
2000 03 06 09 12 15
ECI wages and salaries(a)
(left-hand scale)
Unemployment rate
 (right-hand scale)
Chart 1.4 Some pickup in US wage growth over the past
year following falls in the unemployment rate
US wage growth and unemployment rate
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
(a) Employment Cost Index measure of wages and salaries for civilian workers.
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
2003 05 07 09 11 13 15
Consumer
Industrial Services
Net balances
+
–
Chart 1.3 Euro-area consumer confidence fell slightly
in July
Euro-area consumer and business confidence measures
Source: European Commission.
4 Inflation Report August 2015
and industrial production suggest that domestic demand
growth picked up slightly in Q2. But annual export growth
slowed, which may in part reflect the 13% rise in the renminbi
ERI over the past year. In addition, equity prices have fallen by
around 30% since mid-June, following an increase of around
150% in the preceding year (Chart 1.11). These developments
prompted the authorities to cut benchmark lending rates and
introduce measures to support equity prices.
Bank staff project calendar-year growth of slightly below 7%
in 2015, broadly in line with the authorities’ target, with past
policy easing supporting growth in the second half of the year.
Currency appreciation, however, is likely to continue to limit
export growth. Recent developments in equity markets are
expected to have only a small effect on confidence and private
sector activity. But they highlight the potential risks to
financial stability and growth, and the challenges policymakers
face, as Chinese financial markets liberalise further.
The picture for activity in other emerging economies was
mixed: output contracted in Brazil and Russia in Q1, while
Indian growth was robust. Overall, emerging-economy
growth is expected to remain below pre-crisis rates in 2015.
There is a risk that a tightening in US monetary policy
(Section 1.2) could weigh on activity in emerging economies if
it is associated with large capital outflows and falls in asset
prices. According to estimates from the Institute of
International Finance, capital inflows to emerging economies
slowed during 2015 Q2.
Commodity prices and global inflation
Following a sharp fall over the second half of 2014, and a
pickup during the spring, the Brent crude spot oil price was
US$55 in the run-up to the August Report, 12% lower than
three months earlier (Chart 1.5). Some of the fall in oil prices
could reflect lower expected oil demand. But some of the fall
is likely to reflect higher expected oil supply. The International
Energy Agency revised up its forecast for US oil supply in
2015 H2, as production has remained relatively robust despite
the past fall in oil prices. And there are rising expectations
that sanctions on Iranian oil exports will be lifted, following an
agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme.
The oil futures curve, on which the Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) conditions its forecast, reaches US$67 in
three years’ time. But there are risks around that path. In the
near term, oil inventories, which are already at record highs,
could rise by more than expected, further increasing the cost
of storage. That could lead to falls in spot prices to make
storage economical. In the medium term, the risks appear
more balanced. On the one hand, falls in oil supply and
extraction investment in response to the past fall in prices
could place upward pressure on spot prices. On the other
hand, oil demand growth could slow if downside risks to global
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Indices: 2013 = 100
Agricultural
 prices(b)(c)
Industrial metals
 prices(c)
Oil price(a) May Report
2013 14 15
Chart 1.5 Oil and metal prices have fallen since May
US dollar oil and commodity prices
Sources: Bloomberg, S&P indices, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time.
(b) Total agricultural and livestock S&P commodity index.
(c) Calculated using S&P US dollar commodity price indices.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 5
growth materialise (Section 5), implying further downward
pressure on oil prices.
Moves in the prices of non-energy commodities have been
slightly mixed in recent months. Prices of industrial metals
have fallen by around 12% since May (Chart 1.5). That may in
part reflect concerns about the outlook for demand, but the
fall is also likely to reflect a reduction in the supply concerns
that, according to market contacts, pushed prices up earlier in
the year. In contrast, agricultural commodity prices are at a
similar level to May, having fallen in 2014. Overall, most
energy and non-energy commodity prices are significantly
below their levels a year ago.
Headline inflation rates are currently low relative to historical
averages in many countries (Table 1.C). Much of this is likely
to reflect the impact of the fall in commodity prices,
particularly oil prices. Core inflation rates, however, are also
relatively subdued in many advanced economies (Table 1.C).
That may to some extent reflect indirect effects of lower
commodity prices on the cost of producing goods and services.
But in some countries it is likely to reflect continued slack, and
in others stronger exchange rates.
Reflecting these global inflationary pressures, annual world
export price inflation, weighted according to countries’ shares
in UK imports, was -1.1% in Q1. That, together with the
continued appreciation in the sterling exchange rate
(Section 1.3), is likely to continue to drag on UK import prices
(Section 4).
1.2 Monetary policy
UK, US and euro-area market-implied policy rates three years
ahead were slightly higher in the run-up to the August Report
than in May. There were some fluctuations in early July,
probably reflecting shifting market sentiment about Greece.
More broadly, market-implied rates have risen over much of
2015, reversing part of the falls seen in the second half of
2014. In part, that may have been driven by perceptions of a
strengthening in the inflation outlook, reflecting tightening
labour markets, the stabilisation in oil prices earlier in the year,
and the expected impact of ECB asset purchases on the
economic outlook. Indeed, the weight that market
participants place on the probability of deflation in three
years’ time has fallen since the beginning of the year,
particularly in the euro area (Chart 1.6).
In the United Kingdom, the path for Bank Rate implied by
market prices reaches 1.7% in 2018 Q3, compared with 1.4%
in May (Chart 1.7). Some of that steepening occurred
following the release of stronger-than-expected wage growth
data in June (Section 3). The implied rise in Bank Rate,
however, remains particularly gradual compared with previous
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
United Kingdom(c)
United States(b)
Euro area(b)
Per cent
2014 15
Chart 1.6 Market perceptions of the risk of deflation
lower than in early 2015
Option-implied weight on deflation three years ahead(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Weights are risk-neutral probabilities from estimated option-implied distributions. Such
probabilities contain a compensation for risk, so will differ from market participants’ actual
subjective probabilities. For further discussion of option-implied probability distributions for
inflation, see Smith, T (2012), ‘Option-implied probability distributions for future inflation’,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 52, No. 3, pages 224–33; www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb120303.pdf.
(b) Shows the option-implied risk-neutral probability that consumer price inflation is less than
0% in three years’ time.
(c) As a rough proxy for the weight on CPI inflation being less than 0% in three years’ time, this
shows the option-implied risk-neutral probability that RPI inflation is less than 1% in three
years’ time.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2013 14 15 16 17 18
Per cent
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
Solid lines: August Report
Dashed lines: May Report
ECB main refinancing rate
Bank Rate
Federal funds rate(b)
+
–
Chart 1.7 Market prices imply higher interest rates in
three years’ time than they did in May
International forward interest rates(a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, ECB and Federal Reserve.
(a) The May 2015 and August 2015 curves are estimated using instantaneous forward overnight
index swap rates in the fifteen working days to 7 May and 29 July respectively.
(b) Upper bound of the target range of 0% to 0.25%.
6 Inflation Report August 2015
tightening cycles.(1) The box on page 9 discusses the factors
behind the MPC’s decisions in June and July. The factors
underpinning the Committee’s August decision are set out in
the Monetary policy summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and
in more detail in the minutes of the meeting.(2)
In the United States, the FOMC reaffirmed its view that the
target range for the federal funds rate of 0% to 0.25%
remained appropriate. Market prices imply a rise in the
federal funds rate around the turn of the year, with the
market-implied path for rates reaching 2% in three years’
time, slightly higher than in May (Chart 1.7).
The ECB continued to undertake asset purchases of €60 billion
per month. The path of market-implied interest rates in the
euro area reaches 0.3% in three years’ time, compared to
0.1% in May.
The Bank of Japan also continued its asset purchase
programme, which involves annual purchases of ¥80 trillion of
government bonds, ¥3 trillion of exchange-traded funds and
¥90 billion of real estate investment trusts.
1.3 Developments in other financial markets
Government bond markets
There have been marked fluctuations in long-term interest
rates in recent months, particularly in the euro area. In part,
that reflected shifting market sentiment about Greece during
the breakdown and resumption of negotiations with its
creditors in June and July. Spreads between other euro-area
periphery countries’ government bond yields and German
yields widened a little in early July. But those increases have
largely unwound, and these spreads remain significantly below
levels seen in 2012, when the euro-area sovereign debt crisis
intensified (Table 1.D). Implied interest rate volatilities —
which gauge financial market uncertainty — rose close to
average levels in the major economies, although they too have
since fallen back and remain well below levels seen in 2011–12
(Chart 1.8).
On the whole, UK, US and euro-area long-term interest rates
have risen from their troughs earlier in the year (Chart 1.1). In
the run-up to the August Report, the nominal cost of
government borrowing for the next ten years was around
½ a percentage point higher in the United Kingdom and the
United States, and ¾ of a percentage point higher in the
euro area, than in late April. Despite these recent rises,
however, long-term interest rates are only back to levels seen
in late 2014, and remain substantially below their levels
immediately prior to the crisis.
United States
Euro area
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
+
–
2003 05 07 09 11 13 15
Differences from averages since 2003
(number of standard deviations)
United Kingdom
Chart 1.8 Long-term interest rate implied volatilities
have picked up from low levels earlier in the year
Implied volatilities from three-month options on ten-year interest
rate swaps
Sources: Barclays Live and Bank calculations.
May Report
0
1
2
3
4
5
2010 11 12 13 14 15
Per cent
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
Chart 1.9 Market-based measures of inflation
expectations have risen since early 2015
Five-year, five-year forward implied inflation rates(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Five-year inflation swap rates, five years ahead. The instruments used are linked to RPI for
the United Kingdom, CPI for the United States and HICP for the euro area.
Table 1.D Government bond spreads in some periphery countries
widened in early July, but have narrowed since
Selected European ten-year spot government bond spreads(a)
Percentage points
 Averages
 2007 2010 2012 May 2015 29 June– August 2015
 Report(b) 13 July 2015 Report(c)
Ireland n.a. 3.0 n.a. 0.6 0.8 0.7
Italy 0.3 1.3 3.9 1.3 1.5 1.2
Portugal 0.2 2.5 9.0 1.8 2.2 1.9
Spain 0.1 1.5 4.3 1.2 1.5 1.2
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Spreads over ten-year German government bond yield.
(b) Average of the fifteen working days to 7 May 2015.
(c) Average of the fifteen working days to 29 July 2015.
(1) For further discussion see pages 9–10 of the May 2015 Inflation Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/may.pdf.
(2) The minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2015/aug.pdf.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 7
Part of the recent rise in long-term interest rates is likely to
reflect an unwinding of some of the early market reaction to
the ECB asset purchase programme. Government bond yields
in the euro area fell substantially in anticipation of the
programme, and dropped further in response to the
announcement of its operational details in March. In April,
however, low demand at some euro-area government bond
auctions and a reassessment of the balance between supply
and demand in the government bond market appear to have
led to an unwinding of some of that initial market reaction.
Both the initial fall, and the subsequent rise, may have been
amplified by low market liquidity, as discussed in the July 2015
Financial Stability Report. Long-term interest rates in the
United Kingdom and United States have moved closely with
those in Germany and France (Chart 1.1), in part because
investors tend to see those bonds as close substitutes for each
other.
Another driver of the recent rise is likely to have been
improvements in perceptions of the macroeconomic outlook
in advanced economies. Near-term policy expectations have
risen in the United Kingdom, United States and the euro area
(Section 1.2), although these can only account for part of the
rise in long-term interest rates. The implicit cost of
government borrowing for five years in five years’ time — the
five-year, five-year forward rate — has also risen in those
economies. That could reflect a reduction in perceived
downside risks around the long-term outlook for growth and
inflation. Indeed, implied inflation rates at this horizon have
risen since early 2015, reversing some of the falls in 2014
(Chart 1.9).
Most of the rise in UK and US yields between April and June
reflected a rise in term premia — the compensation that
investors require for risks associated with holding
government bonds, and which will reflect shifts in the
relative supply of bonds — rather than policy expectations
(Chart 1.10). That is consistent with the recent rise in
government bond yields reflecting some unwinding of the
early market reaction to ECB asset purchases, and could also
suggest a reduction in perceived downside risks to the
macroeconomic outlook.
Equity markets
Moves in advanced-economy equity prices have been mixed in
recent months, with some fluctuations in June and July related
to developments in Greek debt negotiations (Chart 1.11).
Overall, UK and euro-area equity prices have fallen by around
4% and 2% respectively since the May Report, while US equity
prices were broadly unchanged. The greater decline in the
United Kingdom was driven by falls in share prices for the oil
and gas sector, which accounts for a higher proportion of the
equity price index in the United Kingdom than is typical in
other countries, following the recent decline in oil prices
(Section 1.1).
100
50
0
50
100
United Kingdom United States
Change in expected policy rates, end-October to end-March
Change in term premia, end-October to end-March
Change in expected policy rates, end-March to end-June
Change in term premia, end-March to end-June
Change in nominal rates, end-October to end-June Basis points
+
_
Chart 1.10 Much of the previous falls in US and UK term
premia has unwound in recent months
Estimates of contributions to changes in ten-year government
bond yields between end-October 2014 and end-June 2015(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Bank calculations.
(a) Total change in monthly model-fitted values of nominal yields. UK estimates are derived
using the model described in Malik, S and Meldrum, A (2014), ‘Evaluating the robustness of
UK term structure decompositions using linear regression methods’, Bank of England Working
Paper No. 518; www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2014/
wp518.pdf. US estimates are available from www.newyorkfed.org/research/data_indicators/
term_premia.html.
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2010 11 12 13 14 15
Indices: 4 January 2010 = 100
May Report
S&P 500
FTSE All-Share
Euro Stoxx
Topix
Shanghai Composite
Chart 1.11 Euro-area and UK equity prices slightly lower
than in May
International equity prices(a)
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream.
(a) In local currency terms.
8 Inflation Report August 2015
Financial and non-financial corporate bond markets
Bond yields for non-financial investment-grade companies in
the United Kingdom, United States and euro area have risen
since April. In the United Kingdom, for example, yields on
those bonds with a maturity of five to ten years have risen by
½ a percentage point on average. That rise largely reflected
the pickup in government bond yields over the period,
although corporate bond spreads — the additional
compensation that investors require for holding corporate
bonds instead of government bonds — were also wider. Some
of the widening in spreads is likely to have reflected the
impact of greater uncertainty around how Greek debt
negotiations would be resolved. Interest rates on corporate
bonds nevertheless remain low relative to pre-crisis levels,
with rates particularly low in the euro area. Those relatively
low euro-area rates may be one reason why UK and US
corporates’ share of euro-denominated issuance has been
higher in recent quarters than in the first half of 2014
(Chart 1.12).
The interest rates at which euro-area and UK banks can raise
wholesale funds also rose in the run-up to the August Report.
In part, that reflected the rise in government bond and other
reference rates. But there was also a small rise in the spreads
banks pay over and above these (Chart 1.13 shows that for
UK banks). As noted in the 2015 Q2 Credit Conditions Review,
some major UK lenders attributed the slight widening in
spreads in Q2, in part, to risks in relation to Greece. Overall,
however, bank funding costs remain at levels significantly
below those seen in 2011 and 2012; and credit conditions
more generally are considerably looser than at that time
(Section 2).
Exchange rates
The sterling ERI was 3½% higher in the fifteen working days to
29 July than in the run-up to the May Report, with rises against
the US dollar and the euro (Chart 1.14). Some of the rise took
place immediately following the general election in May;
according to market contacts, the unexpectedly clear result
removed some near-term political uncertainty that
had been weighing on sterling. But market contacts
also attributed some of the rise to the release of
stronger-than-expected wage growth figures in June, and
which was associated with a rise in short-term interest rates
(Section 1.2). The dollar ERI continued to appreciate, rising by
2.5% since the May Report, while the euro ERI was little
changed.
The continued rise in sterling, which is now 20% higher than
its trough in March 2013, is likely to affect the outlook for
UK exports (Section 2) and the price of imported goods
(Section 4).
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2007 09 11 13 15
United Kingdom
United States
Rest of the world
Euro area
€ billions
08 10 12 14
Chart 1.12 UK and US corporates’ share of
euro-denominated bond issuance has risen
Euro-denominated non-financial corporate bond issuance(a)
Source: Dealogic.
(a) Shows gross bond issuance by non-financial corporates. Includes issuance by financial
subsidiaries of non-financial corporates, and state-owned companies. Non seasonally
adjusted.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
2011 12 13 14 15
Senior unsecured
 bond spreads(a)
Spread on fixed-rate
 retail bonds(b)
Covered bond
 spread(d)
CDS premia(c)
Percentage points
May Report
+
–
Chart 1.13 Bank funding spreads have risen but remain
at low levels
UK banks’ indicative long-term funding spreads
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Markit Group Limited and Bank calculations.
(a) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to mid-swaps for the
major UK lenders’ five-year euro senior unsecured bonds or a suitable proxy when
unavailable.
(b) Unweighted average of spreads for two-year and three-year sterling fixed-rate retail bonds
over equivalent-maturity swaps. Bond rates are end-month rates and swap rates are
monthly averages of daily rates. Bond rates data for July are flash estimates.
(c) Unweighted average of the five-year senior CDS premia for the major UK lenders.
(d) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to swaps for the major
UK lenders’ five-year euro-denominated covered bonds or a suitable proxy.
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
2010 11 12 13 14 15
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
$/£
€/£
Sterling ERI
May Report
Chart 1.14 Sterling ERI higher, reflecting appreciation
against the dollar and the euro
Sterling exchange rates
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 9
Monetary policy since the May Report
The MPC’s central projection in the May Report, under the
assumptions that Bank Rate followed a path implied by
market interest rates and that the stock of purchased assets
remained at £375 billion, was that four-quarter GDP growth
would be at or a little below its historical average rate
throughout the forecast period. Inflation was expected to
remain close to zero in the very near term, returning to the 2%
target by the two-year point, and moving slightly above the
target in the third year of the forecast period.
At the MPC’s meeting ending 3 June, the Committee noted
that there had been relatively little news in the economic data
since the publication of the May Report. As expected,
twelve-month CPI inflation had declined to -0.1% in April,
primarily reflecting the effect on recorded airfares of the
timing of the Easter holidays. That effect would disappear
from the inflation calculation in the May data.
There had also been little in the data to challenge the view
that wage growth would pick up over the coming quarters,
reflecting a further narrowing in the margin of slack in the
labour market and a gradual recovery in productivity. There
remained, however, a range of factors that would influence
the path of wage growth, and therefore inflationary pressure
over the medium term, including: the potential influence of
the current period of near-zero inflation, whether productivity
growth would pick up, and whether the pace of the decline in
unemployment would slow as anticipated.
Committee members’ views of the appropriate stance of
monetary policy had not changed materially on the month,
given the limited amount of news, and all members agreed to
leave the policy stance unchanged. For two members, the
immediate policy decision remained finely balanced between
voting to hold or raise Bank Rate.
By the time of the MPC meeting ending 8 July, the near-term
global outlook was being overshadowed by developments in
Greece and in China, and it was here that the Committee
focused the bulk of their discussions. Following developments
in Greece, Greek asset prices had fallen, but there had been
few signs of material spillovers to other major financial
markets and the United Kingdom and only limited spillovers to
other euro-area economies. In China, the slowing growth of
activity had been accompanied by sharp swings in asset prices.
The authorities had announced a number of supportive
measures during the month although it was as yet unclear
what impact these would prove to have.
Domestically, developments had been more positive. There
had been upward revisions to GDP growth and evidence of
relatively robust private sector spending and sentiment. Wage
growth had surprised to the upside in the April data, although
most of that news had been a result of the unexpected
strength of bonus payments, and so there were questions as to
how far this represented a durable rise in pay growth.
As expected, twelve-month CPI inflation had increased a little
to 0.1% in May, and fallen back to 0.0% in June. As had been
the case for several months, the inflation rate was expected to
remain around zero before picking up notably towards the end
of the year as the impact of the declines in oil and other
commodity prices during the second half of 2014 dropped out
of the annual comparison. The evolution of domestic costs,
such as wages, and how they would be balanced alongside any
persistent influence of external price pressures, would
determine the outlook for inflation in the medium term.
Overall, Committee members agreed that the margin of spare
capacity had continued to shrink, and that domestic cost
pressures had increased.
Setting domestic developments against those in the external
environment, all members thought it appropriate to leave the
stance of monetary policy unchanged. For a number of
members, however, the balance of risks to medium-term
inflation relative to the 2% target was becoming more skewed
to the upside at the current level of Bank Rate. For these
members, the uncertainty caused by recent developments in
Greece was a very material factor in their decisions: absent
that uncertainty, the decision between holding Bank Rate at
its current level versus a small increase was becoming more
finely balanced.
The policy decision at the meeting ending on 5 August, and
the factors behind that decision, are set out in the Monetary
policy summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail
in the minutes of the meeting.(1)
(1) The minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2015/aug.pdf.
GDP has continued to grow at a rate close to its pre-crisis
average over the past couple of years. The preliminary
estimate for Q2 GDP growth was 0.7%. The mature estimate
is also expected to be 0.7% following a dip to 0.5% in Q1
(Chart 2.1). In the near term, GDP growth is expected to
continue at a solid pace, accounted for by increases in service
sector output. The projection for the mature estimate of GDP
growth in Q3 is 0.7% (Chart 2.1).
The composition of demand growth (Table 2.B) reflects
the relative strength of different factors affecting the
UK economy. UK export growth has been dampened by weak
growth among the United Kingdom’s main trading partners.
And the Government’s fiscal consolidation will have weighed
on growth domestically (see the box on page 16). Acting
against these, private domestic demand has been supported
by healthy growth in household real income, past falls in
households’ and businesses’ uncertainty about the outlook,
and improvements in credit conditions since 2013.
2.1 Final demand
Household consumption
In 2015 Q1, household consumption grew by 0.9%, in line with
its pre-crisis average rate, but stronger than anticipated at the
time of the May Report (Table 2.B).
Increases in nominal income, reflecting growth in both
employment and wages, have supported household
consumption. Employment growth has been robust over the
past couple of years (Section 3). And average employee
wages rose by 2.8% in the year to 2015 Q1, according to
National Accounts data. The NMG Consulting survey,
conducted on behalf of the Bank in late April and early May,
also shows that a greater proportion of households are
expecting further increases in their incomes than in the
surveys conducted in early and late 2014. Furthermore, the
GfK measure of consumer confidence remains around its
recent high and above its pre-crisis average level.
10 Inflation Report August 2015
Table 2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in May Developments since May
Cost of credit Broadly in line with expectations
• Credit spreads to decline slightly over
2015.
• Credit spreads narrowed in Q2.
Consumer spending Spending stronger; saving lower
• Quarterly consumer spending growth of
around ¾%.
• Broadly flat household saving ratio.
• Rose by 0.9% in Q1, and expected to
remain above ¾% for the rest of 2015.
• The saving ratio fell in Q1.
Housing market Stronger than expected
• Mortgage approvals to average 65,000
per month in 2015 Q4.
• House prices to increase by just under
½% per month in H2.
• Quarterly housing investment growth to
average ¾%.
• Approvals averaged 66,000 a month in
Q2.
• Average of Halifax and Nationwide
indices rose by ¾% per month in Q2.
Similar rise expected in Q3.
• Housing investment rose by 2.4% in Q1,
outlook a little stronger.
Investment Stronger than expected
• Quarterly business investment growth of
around 1¼%.
• Rose by 2.0% in Q1, although initial
estimates are uncertain. Expected to rise
by 1¼% per quarter over remainder of
2015.
Exports Weaker than expected in Q1
• Average quarterly growth in UK exports
of around 1%.
• Exports little changed in Q1, but level
higher than expected in April and May.
UK GDP growth bounced back to 0.7% in Q2, following weakness in Q1. The increase in aggregate
demand continues to be accounted for by rising domestic expenditure. Consumption growth was
robust in Q1, supported by rising real incomes and easing credit conditions. Business investment
also rose. The current account deficit remained wide at 5.8% of GDP in Q1, but within that the
trade deficit has been narrowing. In the near term, GDP is expected to continue growing at around
its historical average rate.
2 Demand and output
 Section 2 Demand and output 11
Real income has also been boosted by the falls in food, energy
and other import prices since Autumn 2014 (Section 4). The
purchasing power of households’ income has increased as a
result of these price falls, and households appear to have
increased their consumption in response: annual real
consumption growth has picked up, while nominal
consumption growth has remained broadly stable (Chart 2.2).
Real retail sales, a more timely indicator of consumption, have
continued to grow strongly, rising by 4.4% in the year to Q2.
Past falls in oil prices are unlikely to provide much more of a
boost to consumption growth. Although the fall in oil prices
since May (Section 1) and continued pass through of lower
import prices of other goods and services to consumer prices
could support household real income and spending growth in
coming quarters.
Another factor that will have supported overall consumption
growth is the continued fall in retail interest rates. Household
borrowing and deposit rates are significantly lower than in
early 2013, and are now close to historically low levels
(Chart 2.3). In June, the effective interest rate for time
deposits was 1.6% while, according to the flash estimate, the
average quoted interest rate for a £10,000 personal loan was
4.3% in July.(1) Falls in interest rates increase the incentive to
consume rather than save. Reflecting that, non credit card
unsecured borrowing growth has risen, to only a little below
its pre-crisis average rate (Chart 2.4). Higher borrowing
would be expected to be associated with stronger demand for
durable goods in particular: in 2014 most unsecured lending
was for car finance. The level of car purchases has remained
strong, averaging around 100,000 per month since early 2014,
above pre-crisis levels. The path for household interest rates
will depend in part on banks’ wholesale funding costs, which
have risen slightly since the May Report (Section 1). These are
likely to pass through to higher household interest rates over
time, although any rise would be very small in comparison
with the decline seen since 2013.
Consumption grew a little faster than income in Q1, so the
household saving ratio fell (Table 2.C). Saving out of available
income — which excludes income recorded as going directly
into pension funds, and so is likely to be more closely related
to consumption — was more stable, however, and has been
around its current level since the start of 2014. Consumption
growth is projected to average a little over ¾% a quarter
during the remainder of 2015.
The housing market
Households’ income expectations and credit conditions will
also affect their decisions over whether to purchase a new
home. In turn, demand for housing will affect the number of
homes built and spending on home improvements. The revival
Table 2.B Private domestic demand growth has been robust
Expenditure components of demand(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
 Averages
 1998– 2008– 2010– 2013 2014 2014 2015
 2007 09 12 H1 H2 Q1
Household consumption(b) 0.9 -0.6 0.1 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9
Private sector investment 0.6 -3.8 1.3 2.0 3.1 0.2 2.1
of which, business investment(c) 0.5 -1.9 1.5 1.7 2.5 0.0 2.0
of which, private sector
housing investment 0.9 -8.1 1.4 2.8 4.5 0.8 2.4
Private sector final domestic
demand 0.9 -1.2 0.4 0.7 1.2 0.6 1.3
Government consumption
and investment(c) 0.8 0.8 -0.1 0.0 0.5 0.6 1.0
Final domestic demand 0.9 -0.7 0.3 0.5 1.0 0.6 1.2
Change in inventories(d)(e) 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.3 -0.3 -0.1 0.7
Alignment adjustment(e) 0.0 -0.1 0.1 -0.1 0.0 0.3 -0.9
Domestic demand 0.8 -0.7 0.3 0.7 0.7 0.7 1.0
‘Economic’ exports(f) 1.2 -1.0 0.9 0.1 0.7 1.9 0.4
‘Economic’ imports(f) 1.4 -1.2 0.8 0.5 0.2 1.5 2.3
Net trade(e)(f) -0.1 0.1 0.0 -0.1 0.1 0.1 -0.6
Real GDP at market prices 0.7 -0.7 0.3 0.6 0.9 0.8 0.4
Memo: nominal GDP at
market prices 1.3 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.0 0.7
(a) Chained-volume measures unless otherwise stated.
(b) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Investment data take account of the transfer of nuclear reactors from the public corporation sector to
central government in 2005 Q2.
(d) Excludes the alignment adjustment.
(e) Percentage point contributions to quarterly growth of real GDP.
(f) Excluding the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC) fraud. Official MTIC-adjusted data are not
available for exports, so the headline exports data have been adjusted by an amount equal to the ONS
import adjustment.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2011 12 13 14 15
Projection(c)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
Projection for preliminary GDP at
 the time of the May Report(c)
GDP
Estimate implied by the
 mode of the latest backcast(b)
+
–
Chart 2.1 GDP growth bounced back in Q2
Bank staff projections for near-term output growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures. GDP is at market prices.
(b) The latest backcast, shown to the left of the vertical line, is a judgement about the path for
GDP in the mature estimate of the data. The observation for 2015 Q3, to the right of the
vertical line, is consistent with the MPC’s central projection.
(c) The magenta diamond shows Bank staff’s central projection for the preliminary estimate of
GDP growth for Q2 at the time of the May Report. The green diamond shows the current
projection for the preliminary estimate of GDP growth in Q3. The bands either side of the
diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean squared error
of forecasts for quarterly GDP growth made since 2004.
(1) The flash estimate for July of the quoted interest rate on a £10,000 unsecured loan is
an early estimate of the provisional estimate, which will be published on 11 August.
12 Inflation Report August 2015
in consumer confidence and sharp falls in mortgage rates in
the past few years, to historically low levels (Chart 2.5), would
be expected to be associated with increased housing
transactions and mortgage demand. Housing transactions and
mortgage approvals have been relatively subdued compared
with their pre-crisis levels (Chart 2.6), but are expected to rise
over the forecast period (Section 5).
The weakness in housing transactions in part seems to reflect
relatively few existing homeowners putting their homes up for
sale. As discussed in previous Reports, for some homeowners
this may be because the terms on a new mortgage would be
more expensive than those on their existing mortgage. This
would be especially true for those wanting to buy a more
expensive property, because mortgages with a higher loan to
value (LTV) ratio have higher rates than those with a lower
LTV. Although the spread between these rates has narrowed
somewhat over the past year, it remains wider than prior to
the crisis, and may be restricting the ability of transaction
chains to form.
Although supply remains weak, demand for house purchases
may have begun to pick up. The new buyer enquiries balance
from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors survey has
become more positive during 2015. Consistent with that
reported rise in demand, mortgage approvals for house
purchase increased in Q2 to 66,000 per month on average
(Chart 2.6). That was slightly stronger than expected at the
time of the May Report, although still well below expectations
of a year ago.
It is unclear how much further, and how quickly, mortgage
approvals will rise. The rise in approvals in Q2 was
concentrated in April and, although the near-term outlook for
approvals is stronger than at the time of the May Report —
with 68,000 projected on average per month in Q3 — the
changes announced in the Summer Budget 2015 are likely to
weigh on activity in the medium term. The announced
reduction in mortgage interest tax relief for rental properties
may reduce demand in the buy-to-let sector and associated
mortgage lending. And the announced increase in the
inheritance tax allowance for homeowners is likely to reduce
the incentive for older homeowners to trade down, weighing
on secondary market housing supply and the number of
housing market transactions. Overall, the measures
announced in the Budget are projected to weigh on mortgage
approvals by around 2% in three years’ time.
The balance between housing supply and demand may be
putting upward pressure on house prices. In Q2, the average
monthly rise in the Halifax and Nationwide house price indices
was ¾%, a little stronger than expected at the time of the
May Report. Leading indicators suggest that house prices will
continue to rise at that pace in Q3.
+
–
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2000 03 06 09 12 15
Percentage changes on three months earlier (annualised)
Credit card
Other unsecured loans and
 advances (excluding student loans)
Averages, 1998–2007
Chart 2.4 Non credit card unsecured lending growth
close to past average rate
Unsecured loans to individuals
+
–
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Real
(a)
Nominal
Chart 2.2 Greater purchasing power has contributed to
an increase in real consumption growth
Household consumption
(a) Chained-volume measure.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Per cent
One to five-year fixed-rate unsecured loans(b)
£10,000 unsecured loan(c)(d)
Outstanding time deposit(b)
Outstanding interest-bearing sight deposit(b)
Chart 2.3 Unsecured lending rates remain low
Household deposit and unsecured lending interest rates(a)
(a) Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) End-month effective rate. Data are to June.
(c) Sterling-only end-month average quoted rates. The Bank’s quoted rates series are weighted
averages of rates from a sample of banks and building societies with products meeting the specific
criteria (see www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/iadb/notesiadb/household_int.aspx).
(d) The July £10,000 loan rate is a flash estimate of the provisional estimate which will be published
on 11 August.
 Section 2 Demand and output 13
The weakness in housing transactions has weighed on related
expenditures — such as estate agents’ services — in recent
years. But the other element of housing investment, dwellings
investment, has been growing strongly (Chart 2.7). This
comprises spending on new buildings and home
improvements, and is less closely related to transactions. Past
ONS estimates of dwellings investment have been revised up
as the counterpart to upward revisions to construction sector
output (Section 2.2). Together, dwellings investment and
spending associated with housing transactions grew by 2.4%
on the quarter in 2015 Q1, and are projected to grow by
around 1¼% per quarter for the remainder of 2015.
Business investment
Business investment has made a substantial contribution to
growth in recent years, although the quarterly growth profile
has been volatile. In 2015 Q1, business investment rose by
2.0% (Table 2.B), although early estimates are often subject
to large revisions.
The recovery in aggregate demand, and the desire among
companies to increase capacity in response, is likely to have
been a key driver of the strength in business investment.
Surveys of capacity utilisation, for example, are close to or a
little above their historical averages (Section 3). The increase
in business investment has been concentrated in the service
sector, where output growth has been strongest (Section 2.2).
And the proportion of respondents to the CBI Service Sector
Survey saying that they are investing to expand capacity has
risen back to around its pre-crisis level over the past couple of
years.
Corporate credit conditions have also supported business
investment. Respondents to the Credit Conditions Survey
reported that overall credit availability was broadly unchanged
in 2015 Q2, following significant improvements during the
past couple of years, and that the spreads charged on loans
had fallen. The almost 1 percentage point fall in the effective
interest rate on businesses’ time deposits since the start of
2013, and the lower cost of external finance, will have
encouraged businesses to invest using both internal and
external sources of finance. Private non-financial corporations
(PNFCs) raised net external finance of over £11 billion in
2015 H1 (Table 2.D), the largest amount of H1 finance raised
since 2009.
In contrast to the strength in investment in other sectors,
capital spending in the oil and gas extraction sector has been
weak. Extraction sector investment fell slightly in 2015 Q1,
and is projected to be around 30% below its peak by the end
of the MPC’s forecast period. That projection primarily
reflects a response to the fall in oil prices since mid-2014
(Section 1), although there is a high degree of uncertainty
around the extent to which extraction investment will
respond. The impact on total business investment of lower oil
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2003 05 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Two-year fixed mortgage(c)
Five-year fixed
 mortgage(c)
Two-year variable mortgage(c)
Lifetime tracker mortgage
Chart 2.5 Mortgage interest rates are low
Average quoted mortgage interest rates(a)(b)
(a) See footnote (c) to Chart 2.3.
(b) The data for July are a flash estimate of the provisional estimate, which will be published on
11 August.
(c) On mortgages with a loan to value ratio of 75%.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2006 09 12 15
Thousands per month
Housing
 transactions(a)
Mortgage approvals for
 house purchase
Projection for approvals at the
 time of the May 2014 Report(b)
Projection for approvals at the
 time of the May 2015 Report
(b)
Chart 2.6 Mortgage approvals rose in Q2
Mortgage approvals and housing transactions
Sources: Bank of England, HM Revenue and Customs and Bank calculations.
(a) Number of residential property transactions for values of £40,000 or above.
(b) Bank staff’s projections for the average number of approvals per month in 2015 Q2.
Table 2.C Real income growth has been a key driver of
consumption growth
Income, consumption and saving
 Averages
 1998– 2010– 2013 2014 2014 2015
 2007 12 H1 H2 Q1
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Real post-tax income(a) 3.1 0.1 0.0 2.0 2.2 2.9
Real post-tax labour income(b)
 3.2 -0.9 0.4 2.9 2.6 2.1
Consumption(c) 3.7 0.5 1.7 2.1 2.9 3.4
Per cent
Saving ratio(d) 8.7 9.2 6.4 6.2 6.0 4.9
Saving out of available income(e) -2.0 0.9 -0.5 -2.3 -1.9 -2.3
(a) Total available household resources divided by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(b) Wages and salaries plus mixed income less taxes plus net transfers, divided by the consumer expenditure
deflator.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(d) Percentage of household post-tax income.
(e) Percentage of household post-tax income excluding flows into employment-related pension schemes.
14 Inflation Report August 2015
prices will also depend on whether those businesses that
benefit from lower prices increase investment in response.
Survey indicators suggest continued near-term growth in
investment, albeit at slightly less rapid rates than in 2014
(Chart 2.8). There are few signs that events in the euro area
have weighed on investment: the percentage of respondents
to the CBI Quarterly Industrial Trends Survey reporting that
uncertainty was likely to hold back their investment decisions
was low by historical standards in July. Overall, investment
growth is expected to average around 11/$% per quarter over
the remainder of 2015, supported by a further recovery in
demand and the past easing in credit conditions.
Government spending
The Government’s fiscal plans, on which the MPC’s forecast is
conditioned, embody a continued consolidation. According to
the Institute for Fiscal Studies, around half of the total
planned consolidation, relative to the pre-recession
March 2008 Budget, has taken place. The consolidation is
likely to weigh on spending across the economy: a detailed
discussion of the measures announced in the Summer Budget
2015 and their implications are set out in the box on
page 16.
The Government’s fiscal consolidation will directly reduce
nominal government consumption of goods and services as a
share of GDP. In the year to 2015 Q1, nominal government
consumption rose by 0.5%, compared with nominal GDP
growth of 4.3%. The implications for measured real
government consumption — which rose by 2.3% in the year to
Q1 — may be limited, however, because of the way in which
real consumption is estimated. Real government consumption
on school education, for example, is largely measured using
the number of pupils taught, which is likely to be invariant to
nominal government spending.(1) Cuts in nominal government
spending may have a longer lasting effect on other
expenditure components, such as household consumption, for
example due to the relatively slower growth of public sector
wages.
Exports and the current account
The demand for UK exports will be heavily influenced by
global developments (Section 1). Export growth is volatile, but
since early 2013 has averaged around ¾% per quarter, below
its pre-crisis average of 1¼% (Table 2.B). The weakness in
export growth over the past year or so primarily reflects
subdued global growth: UK-weighted world GDP grew by
2¼% in the four quarters to Q1, below its historical average
rate of 3% (Section 1). Survey indicators suggest that goods
exports will continue to rise in the near term, but at a more
60
40
20
0
20
40
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Costs associated with housing transactions
Repairs and maintenance
New builds
Private housing investment (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 2.7 New building accounts for most of the recent
growth in housing investment
Contributions to four-quarter private housing investment
growth(a)
(a) Chained-volume measure.
Table 2.D PNFCs continue to raise external finance
Net external finance raised by PNFCs(a)
£ billions
 Quarterly averages
 2003– 2009– 2013 2014 2015
 08 12 Q1 Q2
Loans 11.7 -6.2 -2.1 -0.9 3.5 -0.4
Bonds(b)(c) 3.4 3.2 3.0 3.3 0.4 2.7
Equities(b) -2.1 1.3 -1.2 1.6 1.8 1.0
Commercial paper(b) 0.0 -0.4 0.0 -0.6 2.4 0.6
Total
(d) 12.7 -2.0 -0.5 3.2 7.8 3.4
Memo: PNFC loan growth(e)
 2.8 -0.7 -0.1 -0.4 0.6 -0.5
(a) Includes sterling and foreign currency funds.
(b) Non seasonally adjusted.
(c) Includes stand-alone and programme bonds.
(d) As component series are not all seasonally adjusted the total may not equal the sum of its components.
(e) Sterling net lending excluding the effects of securitisation. Percentage change on a quarter earlier.
+
–
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
ONS non-extraction sector
 business investment(a)
Range of investment
 intentions surveys(b)
Chart 2.8 Surveys suggest continued robust investment
growth
Investment intention surveys and business investment
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measure. Data are to 2015 Q1 and take account of the transfer of nuclear
reactors from the public corporation sector to central government in 2005 Q2.
(b) Includes survey measures of investment intentions from the Bank’s Agents (companies’
intended changes in investment over the next twelve months), BCC (net percentage balance
of companies who say they have increased planned investment in plant and machinery over
the past three months) and CBI (net percentage balance of companies who say they have
revised up planned investment in plant and machinery over the next twelve months), scaled
to match the mean and variance of four-quarter business investment growth since 2000.
BCC data are non seasonally adjusted. Measures weight together sectoral surveys using
shares in real business investment.
(1) For further discussion of measuring real government consumption see the box on
page 21 of the May 2012 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/ir12may.pdf.
 Section 2 Demand and output 15
modest pace than in late 2013 and early 2014 (Chart 2.9).
Monthly goods export volumes, however, rose strongly in
April, in part reflecting higher oil exports. Some of that more
recent strength may reflect an unwind of weakness in official
data in early 2014, when survey indicators pointed to stronger
growth. During the second half of 2015, exports are expected
to rise by ¼% per quarter on average, reflecting continued
weakness in global demand. The 20% appreciation in sterling
since its trough in 2013 is also likely to weigh on export
growth as it reduces exporters’ profitability.
Partly reflecting the higher level of exports in April and May,
the trade deficit has narrowed significantly and in 2015 Q2 as
a whole is expected to be 0.7% of GDP, its lowest since 1998.
That improvement also reflects weak import growth so far in
Q2 (Section 2.2). Those nominal trends are also likely to be
associated with a substantial contribution to quarterly growth
from net trade in Q2.
Despite the narrowing in the trade deficit, the current account
deficit has remained very wide.(1) In 2015 Q1, the current
account deficit was 5.8% of GDP (Chart 2.10), close to its
average in 2014. The deterioration in the current account
balance in recent years mainly reflects an increase in the
primary income deficit: returns on UK companies’ operations
abroad have fallen and profits earned in the United Kingdom
by foreign companies have risen.
2.2 Provision of goods and services
Final spending in the economy, whether for consumption,
investment or export, will be met by a combination of
domestic and imported production. How quickly domestic
output and imports rise depends, in part, on how quickly
different components of final demand increase. Chart 2.11
illustrates the relationship between the components of final
spending and production in 2010; the ribbons indicate how
much of each expenditure component come from each output
sector and how much was imported. For example, a much
greater share of household consumption came from service
sector output and as imports than from the manufacturing
sector. Manufacturing sector output, in contrast, was more
closely linked to export demand than domestic consumption
or investment.
The precise relationship between spending and output is likely
to vary through time. It will depend on both demand
conditions (Section 2.1), the ability of the economy to supply
goods and services (Section 3) rather than import them, and
the relative price of domestically produced goods and services
to those that are imported. The broad relationship between
+
–
24
20
16
12
8
4
0
4
8
12
16
20
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
ONS goods exports(b)
Range of survey
 indicators(a)
Chart 2.9 Surveys point to modest growth in exports in
coming months
Goods exports and survey indicators
Sources: BCC, CBI, Markit/CIPS, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Includes measures of manufacturing export orders from BCC, CBI and Markit/CIPS scaled to
match the mean and variance of annual goods export growth since 2000. BCC data are
non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Goods export data exclude the estimated impact of MTIC fraud. The diamond shows
Bank staff’s projection for 2015 Q2 based on data for April and May.
(1) For further discussion of trends in the current account see pages 20–22 of the
July 2015 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/fsrfull1507.pdf.
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
2006 09 12 15
Secondary income
Primary income
Trade balance(a)
Current account balance
Percentages of nominal GDP
+
–
07 08 10 11 13 14
Chart 2.10 Current account deficit remains wide but the
trade deficit has narrowed
UK current account
(a) The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for the trade balance based on data for April and
May.
16 Inflation Report August 2015
The fiscal consolidation
Since the 2009/10 fiscal year, a significant fiscal consolidation
has been under way. Public sector net borrowing peaked in
2009/10 at over 10% of GDP, and fell to around 5% in
2014/15 (Chart A). The Government plans to continue this
consolidation over coming years: the latest tax and spending
plans — on which the MPC’s projections are conditioned —
were presented in the Summer Budget 2015. This box sets out
the broad composition of the planned consolidation, how
these have changed in the latest Budget, and the implications
for the MPC’s central projection of those changes.
The Government’s fiscal plans
In the Summer Budget, public sector net borrowing was
projected to continue falling, with the public finances reaching
a balanced position by 2019/20. This remaining consolidation
is planned to be achieved primarily through lower government
spending, rather than higher tax revenue. The spending plans
see public sector spending fall by around 4½% of GDP,
concentrated in welfare payments and non ring-fenced
departmental spending. Current tax receipts are expected to
rise by only around 1% of GDP.
Changes in the Summer Budget
The changes contained in the Summer Budget have smoothed
the path of the fiscal consolidation over the course of this
parliament, relative to those set out in the March Budget, and
on which the MPC’s May projections were conditioned. The
consolidation is a little more gradual in 2016/17 and 2017/18,
but commensurately quicker in 2018/19 and 2019/20
(Chart A). By the 2019/20 fiscal year, as at the time of the
March Budget, the Government expects a small fiscal surplus.
The changes to the overall scale of the consolidation, however,
were small relative to its absolute size.
While there are only small changes to the planned fiscal deficit
relative to the March Budget, the mix of the consolidation has
changed substantially, as the Government has clarified its
spending plans (Chart B). The level of departmental spending
is higher throughout this parliament, and the effect of this on
the deficit is broadly offset by larger increases in taxes and
cuts to welfare payments than previously announced.
Macroeconomic impact of the changes
The overall drag on economic activity from the consolidation
is uncertain. It will depend on factors such as the proportion
of people who are credit constrained, and therefore cannot
smooth through changes in their income, and the extent to
which some households and companies have anticipated the
changes and have already adjusted their spending. And it will
depend on any impact that the consolidation has on other
factors, such as asset prices, the exchange rate and confidence.
Based on the current Government’s fiscal plans, a little less of
the consolidation now takes place during the MPC’s forecast
period than was the case in the May projections, with more
happening in future years (Section 5). The changes in the
composition of the consolidation are likely to have differing
effects on GDP both in terms of their initial impact and how
long they drag on demand. For example, reductions in public
investment will reduce GDP directly, whereas the effects of
other measures, such as changes to public sector pay or taxes,
may take longer to feed through and depend on how
households and companies react to changes in their income.
+
–
5
0
5
10
15
1990 94 98 2002 06 10 14 18
Percentages of nominal GDP
Latest ONS data
March 2015
OBR projections
July 2015
OBR projections
Chart A The profile for the fiscal consolidation is slightly
smoother following the Summer Budget 2015
Public sector net borrowing(a)
Sources: Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) and ONS.
(a) Excludes the temporary effects of financial interventions. Data are for financial years.
Observations to the right of the line are projections from the Office for Budget
Responsibility’s March 2015 and July 2015 Economic and Fiscal Outlooks.
2
1
0
1
2 2014/15 15/16 16/17 17/18 18/19 19/20
+
–
Other consumption
Debt interest
Benefits
Investment
Taxes
Total
Percentage points of nominal GDP (inverted)
Chart B The composition of the fiscal consolidation has
changed
Changes to the fiscal consolidation announced in the
Summer Budget 2015(a)
Sources: HM Treasury, Institute for Fiscal Studies and Office for Budget Responsibility.
(a) Bars represent the changes to the planned fiscal tightening (reduction in government
borrowing) between the March 2015 Budget and Summer Budget 2015, decomposed into tax
increases and spending cuts, with the spending cuts further decomposed into benefits cuts,
other current spending cuts and investment spending cuts. See
www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7879 for more details.
 Section 2 Demand and output 17
demand and output illustrated in Chart 2.11, however,
combined with the relative strength in consumption and the
weakness in exports, may help to explain why the strength in
output growth over the past year has been concentrated in the
service sector.
Imports
The demand for imports will depend on both the strength in
final demand and the relative prices of imports compared with
domestically produced goods and services. A key determinant
of those relative prices will be the sterling exchange rate,
which has appreciated by 20% since its trough in 2013
(Section 1), having depreciated by 25% in 2007–08. Prior to
the depreciation of sterling the share of final demand that was
imported, adjusted for the weight of imports in different types
of spending, had been steadily rising (Chart 2.12). But since
2007, that import share has been broadly stable, as the
relative price of those imports rose and households and
businesses stopped substituting away from UK-produced
goods and services and towards imports.
The recent appreciation of sterling might be expected to boost
the share of imports in final demand, but there is, as yet, little
sign of that. In 2015 Q1, import volumes grew by 2.3%
following rises of around 1½% a quarter in 2014 H2. But in
April and May real goods imports dropped back a little,
contributing to the narrowing in the trade deficit (Section 2.1).
Overall, during the second half of 2015, imports are expected
to rise by around ¾% per quarter.
GDP
GDP grew by 0.7% in 2015 Q2 according to the ONS’s
preliminary estimate. That was slightly stronger than
expected at the time of the May Report, and close to its
average growth rate since 2013. That follows growth of 0.4%
in Q1 (Chart 2.1). Since the May Report, GDP growth has been
revised up over the past, in particular since late 2014. The
upward revisions were concentrated in the construction
sector. Bank staff anticipate further upward revisions to GDP
growth reflecting the pattern of past revisions and strength in
the surveys relative to official estimates. In the mature
estimates, growth in Q1 is projected to be revised up to 0.5%,
while growth in Q2 is projected to be unchanged at 0.7%.
The pickup in GDP growth in 2015 Q2 reflected some
bounceback in service sector growth, following a slowing in Q1
(Table 2.E). Production sector output rose strongly on the
quarter, as an unusually sharp rise in energy sector output
more than offset a slight fall in manufacturing output. The
level of construction sector output was unchanged in Q2.
The near-term outlook for GDP growth
In the near term, GDP growth is projected to continue around
its average rate since 2013. While the strength in energy
sector output growth in Q2 is unlikely to be repeated, growth
Government
 consumption
Gross capital
 formation
Manufacturing
Utilities
Imports
Distribution, hotels
and restaurants
Business services
and finance
Government and
other services
Construction
Exports
Private
 consumption
Raw materials
Transport, storage
and communication
Expenditure Output
Chart 2.11 Pattern of output growth reflects demand
growth
Mapping between expenditure components and output sectors(a)(b)
(a) Based on the United Kingdom Input-Output Analytical Tables 2010. The share of value added
from each output sector in each expenditure component is calculated by multiplying the
demand for output from each sector by the share of value added in the output of each
sector, which is set out in the ‘Matrix of coefficients’. The demand for output of each sector
is calculated by multiplying the final demand, set out in the ‘Domestic use’ table, by the
Leontief Inverse for each sector.
(b) The import share is calculated by adding together final imports and intermediate imports.
Final imports are calculated by dividing the import content of each final expenditure
component, from the ‘Import use (product by product)’ tables, by total final demand for
each expenditure component, detailed in the ‘Combined use’ matrix. Intermediate imports
are calculated by multiplying final demand by their intermediate import content, as set out
in the ‘Matrix of coefficients’.
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
1997 2000 03 06 09 12 15
Index: 2011 = 100
Chart 2.12 Imports have grown in line with final demand
Imports relative to import-weighted demand(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) UK imports as a proportion of import-weighted total final expenditure, chained volume
measures. Import-weighted total final expenditure is calculated by weighting together
household consumption (including non-profit institutions serving households),
whole-economy investment (excluding valuables), government spending, stockbuilding
(excluding the alignment adjustment) and exports by their respective import intensities.
Import and export data have been adjusted to exclude the estimated impact of MTIC fraud.
Import intensities are estimated using the United Kingdom Input-Output Analytical Tables
2010.
18 Inflation Report August 2015
in service sector output is expected to continue to increase
back towards its average rate, as consumption continues to
grow at a robust pace. Survey indicators are consistent with
continued growth at around current rates: a growth rate of
0.7% is incorporated into the MPC’s fan chart for Q3,
consistent with a preliminary estimate of 0.6% (Chart 2.1).
Table 2.E Output growth has been concentrated in the service
sector
GDP and sectoral output(a)
 Averages
 1998– 2010– 2013 2014 2014 2015
 2007 12 H1 H2 Q1 Q2
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
Production(b) 0.0 -0.2 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 1.0
of which, manufacturing 0.1 0.2 0.3 1.1 0.4 0.1 -0.4
Construction 0.5 0.2 1.3 3.1 1.2 -0.2 0.0
Services 1.0 0.5 0.6 0.9 0.8 0.5 0.6
GDP 0.7 0.3 0.6 0.9 0.8 0.4 0.7
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Memo:
GDP 3.1 1.4 1.7 2.8 3.2 2.9 2.6
GDP backcast 3.1 1.5 1.9 3.2 3.5 3.1 2.9
(a) Chained-volume measures. GDP is at market prices. Indices of sectoral output are at basic prices.
(b) Includes output of mining and quarrying and utilities sectors.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 19
3 Supply and the labour market
Unemployment and average hours were unchanged and participation fell in the three months to
May. Survey measures of capacity utilisation ticked up. The MPC’s best collective judgement is
that, taken together, alongside top-down estimates, these developments leave the degree of slack
in the economy broadly unchanged from that in the May Report. Wage growth has picked up,
reflecting both the past narrowing in slack and a pickup in productivity growth.
Table 3.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in May Developments since May
Unemployment Higher than expected
• Headline LFS unemployment rate to
decline to around 5¼% by the end
of 2015.
• Unchanged at 5.6% in the three months to
May, and is expected to change little in Q3.
Participation Lower than expected
• Labour participation rate to remain
broadly unchanged over the rest of the
year.
• Fell slightly to 63.3% in the three months
to May. Likely to pick up slightly and
remain around 63.4% in upcoming
quarters.
Average hours Lower than expected
• Average hours worked to increase by
around ½% in the year to 2015 Q4.
• Unchanged in the three months to May.
Expected to rise slightly in coming quarters.
Productivity Stronger than expected
• Hourly labour productivity to be
broadly flat during 2015 Q2–Q4.
• Hourly labour productivity growth was
0.8% in the four quarters to Q1.
Earnings growth Stronger than expected
• Four-quarter AWE growth to rise to
2¾% by Q3.
• Four-quarter AWE growth was 3.2% in the
three months to May.
The outlook for output growth depends on demand
(Section 2) and also on the supply capacity of the economy.
The balance between demand and potential supply — that is,
the degree of slack or spare capacity — is one important
determinant of wages (Section 3.3) and broader inflationary
pressures in the medium term (Section 4).
The supply side of the economy cannot be directly observed
and the MPC therefore monitors a range of indicators of the
level of potential supply, its likely evolution and the extent to
which current activity is above or below it. The MPC
reassessed its judgements on the outlook for supply in the
May Report.
As set out in May, robust output growth in recent years has, in
large part, been achieved by increases in total hours worked
(Chart 3.1) as slack in the labour market has continued to be
absorbed. In the latest data, total hours were significantly
weaker than expected at the time of the May Report
(Section 3.1). That could suggest that slack was materially
larger than had been expected. Taken together with other
labour market indicators, surveys of capacity utilisation among
companies (Section 3.2), and top-down statistical estimates
of slack, the MPC’s best collective judgement is, however, that
spare capacity in the economy as a whole remains in the
region of ½% of GDP. There is substantial uncertainty about
that judgement with a range of views among MPC members.
Alongside the strength in hours worked, productivity growth
has been very weak in recent years. Since the May Report,
however, productivity has grown more strongly than expected
(Section 3.2). The past narrowing in labour market slack and
rise in productivity growth have been associated with a pickup
in wage growth (Section 3.3).
3.1 Labour market developments and slack
A key component of supply in the economy is the potential
total number of hours that can be worked without generating
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage points
Hourly productivity(a)(b)
GDP(a)
Total hours
 worked(b)
+
–
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measure, based on the backcast for the final estimate of GDP. Percentage
change on a year earlier.
(b) Based on Bank staff’s assumption for population growth, as explained in the May Report.
Chart 3.1 Productivity accounted for a slightly greater
share of GDP growth in Q1
Decomposition of four-quarter GDP growth
20 Inflation Report August 2015
excessive wage growth. In May, the MPC judged that total
hours worked were only slightly below their potential level.
Total hours fell slightly in the three months to May compared
to the previous three months, however, against expectations
for a rise at the time of the May Report. Within that, all
components were weaker than expected: labour participation
fell, while the unemployment rate and average hours were
unchanged. The MPC’s assumptions about potential labour
supply are unchanged from those presented in the May Report.
The margin of slack in the labour market is, therefore, likely to
be higher than estimated in May.
Population and participation in the labour market
Over the long term, growth in labour supply derives mainly
from overall population growth. Population growth over the
past few years has been supported by an increase in net
inward migration. As discussed in the May Report, the rise in
net migration led Bank staff to revise up their estimates of
labour supply. In the four quarters to 2014 Q4, net inward
migration was around 320,000, equivalent to 0.5% of the
population (Chart 3.2), broadly as assumed in May.
Net inward migration during 2013–14 was around 40,000
higher in total than on average over the past ten years. That
additional contribution to labour supply was, however,
considerably smaller than those from participation and
changes in average hours worked. Despite a continuing drag
from demographic trends — in particular an ageing population
— participation held up during 2013–14, adding around
130,000 to the labour market than would otherwise have
been the case. And the increase in average hours worked
over that period was equivalent to around an additional
370,000 people in work.
The participation rate fell slightly in the three months to May
to 63.3%, compared to 63.5% in the previous three months
(Chart 3.3). That small fall follows rises in recent years that
are likely largely to have been cyclical, as improving labour
market conditions encouraged people back into the workforce.
Labour participation is judged to be now only a little below its
assumed medium-term equilibrium rate. Consistent with that,
the number of economically inactive people reporting to the
Labour Force Survey that they want a job is currently around
pre-crisis average levels.
The medium-term equilibrium rate is expected to remain
broadly flat over coming years, with the drag from an ageing
population broadly offset by the increasing desire of older age
groups to work longer. In the near term, participation is
expected to rise slightly towards that equilibrium rate.
Employment and unemployment
Employment fell by around 67,000 in the three months to
May, following an increase of 248,000 in the three months to
February and against expectations for a further rise at the time
62.0
0.0
62.5
63.0
63.5
64.0
64.5
1992 94 96 98 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Per cent
Participation rate(b)
Central estimate of equilibrium
 participation rate
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
Natural change(a)
Net inward migration
Total (per cent)
Percentage points
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Percentages of 16+ population.
(b) The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2015 Q2, based on ONS data to May 2015.
Chart 3.3 Participation is likely to have fallen slightly
in Q2
Participation rate and Bank staff estimates of the medium-term
equilibrium participation rate(a)
(a) Natural change calculated as the difference between population growth and net inward
migration.
Chart 3.2 Net migration has increased over the past
few years
Contributions to annual population growth
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 21
of the May Report. That reflected both slower growth in the
number of employees and a decline in the number of
self-employed. While this followed a temporary slowing in
output growth in 2015 Q1 (Section 2), indicators of labour
demand remain strong: surveys of employment intentions
generally remain at high levels (Table 3.B) and, while the
number of vacancies relative to the size of the workforce
fell slightly in the latest data, that ratio remains above its
pre-crisis average level. That could suggest employment
growth is likely to rebound. But the slowing in employment
growth may partly reflect companies finding it increasingly
difficult to recruit new employees as labour market conditions
have tightened.
Following sharp falls since mid-2013, the unemployment
rate was 5.6% in the three months to May, unchanged
from that in the three months to February and higher than
the 5.3% expected at the time of the May Report (Chart 3.4).
The claimant count rate — a timely indicator of the
unemployment rate — has been unchanged since March.
The pace at which unemployment can fall further is likely to
be somewhat slower than in the past few years and Bank staff
expect unemployment to change little in the next few months
(Chart 3.4). The flow of people moving from unemployment
to employment is close to its pre-crisis average (Chart 3.5).
And the proportion of people out of work for less than
twelve months has fallen below its pre-crisis average
(Chart 3.6). While the proportion of those out of work for
more than twelve months remains elevated — suggesting
some scope for unemployment to fall further — the ease
with which the unemployed can find a job tends to decline
with the time spent out of employment.
Further ahead, the extent to which unemployment falls, and
its influence on wages, will depend, in part, on the structural
characteristics of the labour market. There is considerable
uncertainty around the long-term equilibrium unemployment
rate, but Bank staff’s central estimate remains around 5%.
The rate could be lower than that, for example due to
improved job search technology and changes to the tax and
benefit system over many years. Alternatively, the rate could
be higher, for example, if the recession has resulted in a
greater degree of mismatch between the skills of the
unemployed and the skills that companies are seeking.
Hours worked
The contribution of each person in work to overall labour
supply will depend on the number of hours that they work.
Over the past few years, companies have met increased
demand by hiring new people, but also by increasing the hours
of existing employees.
The MPC judges that there is likely to be some scope for future
increases in average hours as they are currently slightly below
4.0
0.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Per cent
Projection
Three-month
 unemployment rate
Monthly projections
 in May
2013 14 15
Table 3.B Employment growth has slowed, employment
intentions remain strong
Employment growth, vacancies and survey indicators of employment
intentions
 Averages 2015
 2000– 2010– 2013 2014 2014 Q1 Q2
 07(a) 12 H1 H2
Employment growth(b) 70 67 95 196 108 202 -67
of which, employees(b) 55 33 62 102 175 189 5
of which, self-employed
and other(b)(c) 16 35 33 94 -67 13 -72
Vacancies to labour
force ratio(d) 2.07 1.47 1.66 1.95 2.13 2.26 2.21
Surveys of employment intentions(e)
BCC(f) 19 8 22 29 29 27 29
CBI
(f) 5.4 -0.4 13.8 27.3 26.2 22.4 28.0
Agents(g) 0.8 0.3 0.4 1.2 1.3 1.1 1.3
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS (including the Labour Force Survey) and Bank calculations.
(a) Unless otherwise stated.
(b) Changes relative to the previous quarter in thousands. Figures for 2015 Q2 are data for the three months to
May 2015.
(c) Other includes unpaid family workers and those on government-supported training and employment
programmes classified as being in employment. Calculated as the difference between total employment
and employees.
(d) Vacancies calculated as a percentage of the total labour force. Excludes vacancies in agriculture, forestry
and fishing. Average is 2001 Q2 to 2007. Labour force data for 2015 Q2 are data for the three months
to May.
(e) Measures for the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the
CBI (manufacturing, financial services and business/consumer/professional services) are weighted together
using employee jobs shares from Workforce Jobs. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
(f) Net percentage balance of companies expecting their workforce to increase over the next three months.
(g) End-quarter observation. The scores refer to companies’ employment intentions over the next six months.
The scores are on a scale of -5 to +5.
Sources: Labour Force Survey (LFS) and Bank calculations.
(a) The magenta diamonds show Bank staff’s central projections for the headline
unemployment rate for March, April, May and June 2015, at the time of the May Report.
The green diamonds show the current staff projections for the headline unemployment rate
for June, July, August and September 2015. The bands on either side of the diamonds show
uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean squared error of past Bank
staff forecasts for the three-month LFS unemployment rate.
Chart 3.4 Unemployment rate likely to be broadly flat
in the near term
Bank staff’s near-term unemployment rate projection(a)
22 Inflation Report August 2015
their medium-term equilibrium rate (Chart 3.7). There is
considerable uncertainty over the scale of any future rises,
however. There remain signs of underemployment: for
example, desired hours reported in the Labour Force Survey
are still somewhat above actual average hours and the
proportion of part-time staff who report that they wanted but
could not get a full-time job also remains elevated. But there
could be less slack in average hours if higher household
incomes have reduced some people’s desire to work longer
hours, or second earners’ desire to work at all.
3.2 Productivity and capacity utilisation
Productivity growth is a key determinant of supply and wage
growth (Section 3.3). Growth in productivity — defined as
output per hour worked — has been subdued since the
financial crisis but appears to have picked up recently: in the
four quarters to 2015 Q1, productivity growth was 0.8% and
is expected to have been 1.5% in the four quarters to Q2.
While this marks a considerable strengthening compared to
the past few years, it is still weaker than its pre-crisis average
rate of 2.4%.
The implications of the pickup in productivity growth for the
outlook will depend on the extent to which it reflects an
increase in underlying trend productivity. One factor that will
affect measured productivity growth relative to trend is
companies’ capacity utilisation. Companies using their
existing capital and labour more intensively will increase
measured productivity but there is a limit to how far
companies can do this without putting excessive upward
pressure on their costs. Survey measures suggest that, having
increased since 2013, capacity utilisation picked up a little
in 2015 Q2, and is close to or perhaps slightly above past
average levels (Chart 3.8), slightly higher than expected at the
time of the May Report. That suggests that some of the recent
pickup in productivity growth could be cyclical and hence
temporary, rather than structural.
Another factor that has affected measured productivity
relative to trend is the influence of changes in the composition
of employment. Since mid-2013, employment growth has
been unusually concentrated in lower-skilled occupations and
among employees with fewer qualifications and those who are
new to their roles. To the extent that these characteristics are
associated with lower levels of productivity, this shift in the
composition of employment will have dragged on aggregate
productivity growth over the past two years. But these
compositional effects will drag on productivity growth only for
as long as such shifts continue. So part of the recent rise in
productivity growth may have reflected a diminution of this
compositional effect.
As discussed in the May Report,several other factors are likely
to be weighing on underlying trend productivity growth. For
31.0
0.0
31.5
32.0
32.5
33.0
33.5
34.0
1990 95 2000 05 10 15
Weekly hours
Actual average hours(b)
Desired hours(a)
Central estimate of
 medium-term equilibrium
 average hours
0
1
2
3
4
5
1993 95 97 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Under six months
Six to twelve months
Over twelve months
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1998 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Per cent of unemployment Per cent of employment
Flows from unemployment to
 employment(b) (left-hand scale)
Job-to-job flows(c)
 (right-hand scale)
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Number of hours that the currently employed report that they would like to work, on
average, per week calculated from LFS microdata, which have been seasonally adjusted by
Bank staff. Calculation based on Bell, D and Blanchflower, D (2013), ‘How to measure
underemployment?’, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper No. 13–7.
Data available up to 2015 Q1.
(b) The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2015 Q2, based on ONS data to May 2015.
Chart 3.7 Average hours remain below their equilibrium level
Average weekly hours: actual, desired and Bank staff’s estimate of
medium-term equilibrium
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The number of people unemployed in each duration category, divided by the economically
active population. Dashed lines are averages from 2002 to 2007.
Chart 3.6 Long-term unemployment remains elevated
Unemployment rates by duration(a)
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Based on two-quarter longitudinal microdata. Seasonally adjusted by Bank staff.
(b) Number of people who report being unemployed three months ago, and report being employed.
(c) Number of people who report resigning three months ago, and report being in employment for
less than three months. Expressed as a percentage of 16–64 employment.
Chart 3.5 Flows from unemployment to employment have
risen close to pre-crisis rates
Flows from unemployment to employment and job-to-job flows(a)
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 23
example, forbearance and a low level of Bank Rate may have
allowed businesses that face persistently lower demand to
remain operational, impairing the reallocation of resources to
new or more dynamic companies with the potential to achieve
higher productivity. In addition, it is possible that past
weakness in investment in not only physical but also
‘intangible’ capital, such as employees’ skills, may have
reduced the pace of innovation and hindered companies’
ability to adopt more innovative processes.
The impact of these factors could now be starting to wane,
resulting in faster trend productivity growth. As those factors
continue to subside, productivity growth is expected to
continue to improve, supporting supply growth as the boost
from labour supply diminishes (Section 5).
3.3 Wages
Labour market slack and productivity growth are key
influences on wage growth. Despite the narrowing in labour
market slack in the past few years, the corresponding pickup
in wage growth has only recently started to come through.
Whole-economy pay grew by 3.2% in the three months
to May compared to the same period a year earlier,
1 percentage point stronger than expected at the time of
the May Report. A better gauge of companies’ cost pressures
is private sector pay (Section 4), which grew more rapidly
at 3.8%. That increase was, in part, due to strong growth in
bonuses, which tend to be volatile and may not be a good
indicator of underlying wage pressures. In Q2 as a whole,
private sector regular pay growth is expected to have been a
little lower at 3.3% (Table 3.C), although that was stronger
than growth in Q1.
The recent pickup in wage growth suggests that the impact of
factors that have previously weighed on wage growth could
have started to wane. For example, compositional effects are
likely to have been pushing measured earnings growth down.
Stripping these out, Bank staff estimate that underlying wage
growth is likely to have been around 0.8 percentage points
higher in Q1 than implied by measured earnings growth
(Chart 3.9). It is possible that the pickup in wage growth
since then partly reflects a diminution of these effects. But
the extent to which this is the case is unclear as detailed data
on the composition of changes in the labour force in Q2 are
not yet available.
Another driver of the pickup in wage growth may have been
the past narrowing in slack. The REC survey has suggested
strong growth in starting salaries for some time (Chart 3.10).
But the past weakness in labour market turnover (Chart 3.5)
may have meant that these higher pay pressures have been
slow to pass through to average wages. As people become
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1996 98 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Qualification
Industry
Age
Tenure
Occupation
Other(b)
Total composition
 effects
Percentage points
+
–
Table 3.C Earnings growth likely to have picked up further in Q2
Whole-economy earnings
 Averages 2015
 2001–07 2008 Q3– 2013 2014 2014 Q1 Q2
 2010 Q2 H1 H2
Percentage changes on a year earlier
(1) Total AWE(a) 4.3 1.4 1.2 0.8 1.6 2.3 2.8
(2) AWE regular pay(a)(b) 4.0 2.1 0.9 1.0 1.5 2.3 2.8
(1)–(2) Bonus
contribution(a)(c) 0.3 -0.7 0.2 -0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0
Pay settlements(d) 3.2 2.5 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.0 2.3
Memo: private sector
regular pay(a) 3.9 1.6 1.1 1.3 1.9 2.8 3.3
Sources: Bank of England, Incomes Data Services, the Labour Research Department, ONS and XpertHR.
(a) Figures for 2015 Q2 are estimated based on data for April and May and Bank staff’s projections for June.
(b) Whole-economy total pay excluding bonuses and arrears of pay.
(c) Percentage points. The bonus contribution does not always equal the difference between total AWE growth
and AWE regular pay growth due to rounding.
(d) Average over the past twelve months, based on monthly data.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
1999 2003 07 11 15
Differences from 1999 Q1–2007 Q3 averages
(number of standard deviations)
BCC
Agents
CBI
+
–
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Estimates are shown relative to their averages over 1995 Q2–2015 Q1. Estimates of the effect of
individual and job characteristics are derived from a regression of these characteristics on levels
of employee pay using Labour Force Survey data. The estimate of the total compositional effect
is obtained by combining these estimates with changes in the composition of the labour force.
(b) Other includes gender, region of residence, whether working full-time and whether in public
sector employment.
Chart 3.9 The changing composition of employment
has weighed on average wage growth recently
Estimates of the contribution of employment characteristics to
four-quarter wage growth(a)
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures are produced by weighting together surveys from the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing
and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the CBI (manufacturing, financial
services, business/consumer/professional services and distributive trades) using shares in
nominal value added. The surveys are adjusted to have a mean of zero and a variance of one
over 1999 Q1 to 2007 Q3. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
Chart 3.8 Capacity utilisation rose slightly in Q2
Survey indicators of capacity utilisation(a)
24 Inflation Report August 2015
more confident about their job prospects, these higher starting
salaries and the need to retain staff are likely to pull up
average wage growth further.
Wage growth is expected to continue to strengthen in the
near term, reflecting the past narrowing in labour market
slack (Section 3.1) and the pickup in productivity growth
(Section 3.2) — although four-quarter wage growth is likely
to weaken in 2015 Q4, due to strong bonuses in 2014 Q4. As
the impact of temporary factors currently weighing on wage
growth, such as subdued labour turnover, diminish, wage
growth is likely to outpace productivity growth further. This
will gradually raise unit labour costs, consistent with inflation
returning to the MPC’s 2% target (Section 4). As explained in
the box above, the impact of the National Living Wage
announced in the Summer Budget 2015 is uncertain but
estimated to be small.
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Differences from averages since 1998
(number of standard deviations) Per cent
Private sector annual AWE growth(a)
 (right-hand scale)
REC(d)
 (left-hand scale)
BCC survey(b)(c)
 (left-hand scale)
Agents’ scores(b)
 (left-hand scale)
+
–
+
–
The impact of the National Living Wage
As part of the Summer Budget 2015, the Government
announced the introduction of a National Living Wage (NLW)
through a Living Wage Premium, which will apply on top of
the National Minimum Wage for employees aged 25 and over.
It will be set at £7.20 an hour in April 2016. The profile for
yearly increases is due to be based on recommendations of the
Low Pay Commission and should ensure that the NLW
equates to 60% of median hourly earnings by April 2020.
The NLW could affect the labour market in a number of ways.
It will directly increase the wages of those earning less than
the specified rate of pay. If employers wish to maintain pay
differentials among employees, that could increase the wages
of those already earning more than the NLW. The extent to
which these increases, in turn, put upward pressure on
inflation will depend on a number of factors. Some companies
might be able to offset the increase in labour costs by reducing
non-wage costs. Other companies may look for productivity
improvements, with some achieving that through changing
the size or mix of their staffing.
Bank staff estimate that the overall impacts of the NLW on
wages and labour demand are likely to be limited. Evidence
from the National Minimum Wage largely suggests that the
impact on the wages of other staff has historically tended to
be small. Past evidence suggests that companies have partly
responded in ways other than by increasing prices: for
example, they have adjusted pay structures and reduced other
labour costs, such as overtime pay. There is also limited
evidence of increases in the National Minimum Wage affecting
aggregate employment in the United Kingdom.
Based on the distribution of hourly pay from the Annual
Survey of Hours and Earnings in 2014, Bank staff estimate that
around three million employees are likely to be directly
affected by the new NLW by 2020. Given that, and the
assumption of some indirect effects on people further up the
wage distribution or under the age of 25, Bank staff estimate
that the overall impact is likely to be an increase in the level of
aggregate pay of less than ½% gradually over the next five
years. As a result, Bank staff expect the NLW to boost average
annual wage growth by less than 0.1 percentage points over
the MPC’s forecast period.
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, KPMG/REC/Markit, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Excludes bonuses and arrears of pay.
(b) The Bank’s Agents’ scores and the BCC survey are produced by weighting together indices for
the manufacturing and service sector according to their employment shares. The Bank’s
Agents’ scores are the end-quarter score, and are available from June 1998.
(c) Four-quarter moving average measure. Non seasonally adjusted.
(d) The REC measure is produced by weighting together survey indices for the pay of permanent
and temporary placements using shares in employment; quarterly averages.
Chart 3.10 Earnings growth now more in line with
survey indicators
Private sector earnings and indicators of pay growth
 Section 4 Costs and prices 25
CPI inflation was 0.0% in June. The current weakness in inflation can largely be accounted for by
lower energy, food and other goods prices. But it also reflects weak growth in domestic costs.
Supply chain indicators of current cost pressures, combined with the expected strengthening in
labour cost growth, are consistent with inflation rising back to 2% within the next two years.
Overall, the MPC judges that inflation expectations remain well anchored.
CPI inflation was 0.0% in June, 2 percentage points below the
2% inflation target. The current weakness is predominantly
due to lower energy, food and other goods prices, which are
judged to reflect largely external factors (Section 4.1).
Inflation in the service sector has also been relatively weak,
which is more likely to reflect subdued domestic cost growth.
Inflation is expected to rise to the 2% target within the next
two years. By early 2016, past falls in the prices of food,
energy and other goods will have largely dropped out of the
annual inflation rate, increasing the contribution of these
items to CPI inflation by around 1 percentage point, although
recent falls in energy prices will mean that this contribution
will bear down on inflation for longer than projected in May.
Domestic cost growth is also expected to strengthen. Over
the past two years, output growth has been solid (Section 2),
labour market conditions have tightened and there are some
signs that this is starting to put upward pressure on wages
(Section 3). The inflation outlook will be determined in part
by developments in the cost of traded goods (Section 4.2) and
labour costs, and also by how past changes in costs feed
through the supply chain, companies’ pricing behaviour
(Section 4.3), and how these are affected by changes in
inflation expectations (Section 4.4).
4.1 Consumer prices
CPI inflation was 0.0% in June, as expected at the time of the
May Report (Chart 4.1). As inflation remains more than
1 percentage point below the 2% inflation target, the
Governor has written a third consecutive letter to the
Chancellor as required by the MPC’s remit.(1)
As explained in that letter, three quarters of the current
weakness in inflation relative to the target — 1.5 percentage
points — is due to past falls in energy, food and other goods
prices (Table 4.B). Those falls are judged to reflect
(1) The letter can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/
pdf/cpiletter060815.pdf.
4 Costs and prices
1
0
1
2
3
4
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
2013 14
Projection
15
+
–
CPI
Chart 4.1 CPI inflation expected to remain around zero
over the next few months
Bank staff projection for near-term CPI inflation(a)
(a) The red diamonds show Bank staff’s central projection for CPI inflation in April, May and June
2015 at the time of the May Inflation Report. The blue diamonds show the staff projection
for July, August and September 2015. The bands on each side of the blue and red diamonds
show the root mean squared error of the projections for CPI inflation one, two and three
months ahead made since 2004.
Table 4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in May Developments since May
Inflation expectations Broadly on track
• Indicators of inflation expectations
consistent with meeting the 2% target
in the medium term.
• Movements in indicators of inflation
expectations have been mixed. On
balance, measures are broadly consistent
with the 2% target.
Unit labour costs Weaker than expected
• Four-quarter whole-economy unit
labour cost growth to average 1½%.
• Unit labour costs grew by 0.6% in the four
quarters to 2015 Q1.
Retail energy prices Weaker than expected
• Petrol prices to increase by around 5%
in Q2.
• A further slight reduction in domestic
gas prices in Q2.
• Petrol prices rose by around 5% in Q2, but
expected to fall in Q3.
• Domestic gas prices fell slightly in Q2, and
expected to fall further in Q3.
Import prices Weaker than expected
• Import prices to fall by around 5% in
the year to 2015 Q4.
• Import prices estimated to have fallen by
6½% in the year to 2015 Q2.
26 Inflation Report August 2015
predominantly global factors: compared with a year ago, the
spot US dollar oil price is 47% lower and agricultural
commodity prices 9% lower. In part reflecting this, inflation
has been weak across many countries (Section 1). The 20%
appreciation of sterling since its trough in 2013, and the
resulting weakness in imported goods prices (Section 4.2), will
also have weighed on UK inflation.
One quarter of the weakness in inflation relative to the target
— 0.5 percentage points — is due to weak services price
inflation. Although falls in import prices may have played a
role, this is judged largely to reflect weak domestic cost
pressures. A consequence of the slack that opened up in the
labour market after the 2008/09 recession has, until recently,
been relatively low wage growth, which, in turn, has kept
service sector inflation and measures of domestically
generated inflation subdued but stable (see the box on
pages 28–29).
In the short term, inflation is expected to remain close to zero
(Chart 4.1), before rising around the turn of the year. The
contribution to inflation from energy, food and other goods
prices is likely to increase by around ½ a percentage point by
the end of 2015 (Chart 4.2), and by another ½ percentage
point in the first half of 2016, as past price falls drop out of the
annual comparison. The near-term outlook is, however,
weaker than three months ago, largely due to lower energy
prices (Section 4.2).
As wage growth continues to return to more normal rates —
following the narrowing in labour market slack — and feeds
through into companies’ costs and prices, service sector
inflation and measures of domestically generated inflation are
expected to pick up, consistent with inflation returning to the
2% target (Section 5). There remains, however, considerable
uncertainty around this central projection.
4.2 Developments in the prices of traded
goods and services
The prices of goods and services that are traded globally —
such as food, energy and other imports — have been key
factors pulling down UK CPI inflation over the past year, and
the extent to which inflation remains low will depend, in part,
on how these evolve.
Energy prices
Since the May Report, spot and futures oil prices have fallen by
around 12% in US dollar terms (Section 1), and by around 14%
in sterling terms (Chart 4.3). Petrol prices, which tend to
move closely with the oil price, remain lower than a year ago
and subtracted 0.3 percentage points from CPI inflation in
June.
Table 4.B Three quarters of the weakness in inflation relative to
the target is due to food, energy and other goods prices
Contributions to June 2015 CPI inflation relative to pre-crisis average(a)
Percentage points
 1997–2007 June 2015 Difference
 average(b)
Energy, food and other goods 0.4 -1.1 -1.5
Services 1.6 1.0 -0.5
Total 2.0 0.0 -2.0
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Totals may not sum exactly due to rounding.
(b) Adjusted for the 0.4 percentage point downward bias from clothing that existed until 2010.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Other goods(b) (35%)
Energy (8%)
Food and non-alcoholic
 beverages (11%)
Services (47%)
CPI (per cent)
Percentage points
Projection(c)
+
–
Chart 4.2 The drag from past falls in food and energy
prices will diminish over 2015 H2
Contributions to CPI inflation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Department of Energy and Climate Change, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Contributions to annual CPI inflation. Figures in parentheses are weights in the CPI basket in
2015, and may not sum to 100 due to rounding.
(b) Calculated as the difference between CPI inflation and the contribution from the goods and
services identified in the chart.
(c) Bank staff estimates. Estimates are conditioned on the assumption that utilities companies
reduce gas prices by an average of 5% over 2015 H2. They use Department of Energy and
Climate Change petrol price data for July 2015 and are then based on the August 2015
sterling oil futures curve shown in Chart 4.3.
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
135
150
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2007 09 11 13 15 17
May 2015 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
August 2015 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
Pence per therm £ per barrel
Oil(a)
 (right-hand scale)
Gas(b)
 (left-hand scale)
Chart 4.3 Wholesale energy prices have fallen since May
Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time converted into sterling.
(b) One-day forward price of UK natural gas.
(c) Futures prices at the time of the May Report are averages during the fifteen UK working days
to 7 May for gas and averages during the fifteen US working days to 7 May for oil. Futures
prices at the time of the August Report are averages during the fifteen working days to
29 July 2015.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 27
The recent falls in oil prices mean that petrol prices are
projected to fall slightly over the next few months, and the
contribution from petrol will remain negative for longer than
expected in May. Beyond that, the oil futures curve, upon
which the MPC’s projections are conditioned, slopes upwards
and petrol price inflation is projected to pick up as the past
falls in prices gradually drop out of the annual inflation rate.
There remains uncertainty around the path of the oil price,
however, with risks in both directions (Section 1).
Spot and futures prices of wholesale gas have fallen by around
5% since May (Chart 4.3). The reduction in household gas
prices of around 4% in the first half of 2015 will continue to
subtract around 0.1 percentage points from CPI inflation until
early 2016. Since the May Report, one of the six largest
suppliers of household energy has announced a further
reduction in gas prices of 5% from the end of August. The
near-term forecast is conditioned on the assumption that
other suppliers make similar price reductions, taking a further
0.1 percentage points off CPI inflation until the second half of
2016.
Non-energy import prices
Many goods and services consumed in the United Kingdom are
imported or produced using imports as inputs, so import prices
affect CPI inflation. These import prices depend both on world
export prices and the exchange rate. World export prices —
excluding fuel — have fallen slightly over the past few years
(Chart 4.4), in part as a consequence of lower non-energy
commodity prices and subdued inflation in many countries
(Section 1). Further, sterling has appreciated by 3½% since
the May Report, and by 20% since its trough in 2013. This has
significantly reduced the price of world exports in sterling
terms. This, in turn, will feed through to lower UK import
prices, which, excluding fuels, were 1¼% lower in 2015 Q1
than in the same quarter a year earlier. Most of the
pass-through from changes in exchange rates to import prices
tends to happen within a year, but the extent of pass-through
is highly uncertain and will depend on factors such as the mix
of imports and the currencies that they are priced in. Import
prices have not fallen by as much as might have been
expected. Given the time that has now passed since sterling
began to rise, the MPC judges that the earlier appreciation will
be associated with somewhat less of a fall in import prices
than previously assumed.
The link between import prices and consumer prices is also
highly uncertain. Some goods and services are intermediate
inputs in producing consumer goods, and companies may, in
the short term, absorb changes in import prices in their profit
margins rather than pass them through directly to consumer
prices (Section 4.3). The timing and size of this pass-through
may also depend on the composition of these changes. Prices
of imported food, beverages and tobacco — which were
around 2½% lower in 2015 Q1 than a year earlier (Chart 4.5)
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Foreign export prices
 in sterling terms(a)
UK import price deflator
(b)
Foreign export prices in foreign currency(c)
+
–
Chart 4.4 Sterling appreciation has dragged on UK import prices
UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel
Sources: Bank of England, CEIC, Eurostat, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) Domestic currency non-oil export prices of goods and services of 51 countries weighted
according to their share in UK imports, divided by the sterling effective exchange rate. The
sample does not include any major oil exporters.
(b) Goods and services deflator excluding fuels and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(c) Domestic currency non-oil export prices as defined in footnote (a).
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Food, beverages and tobacco
Services Consumer goods(b)
+
–
Chart 4.5 Components of import price inflation have diverged
Import price inflation by category(a)
(a) Deflators for imported goods and services.
(b) Excludes imports of cars.
Costs
Prices —
 backward looking
Prices —
 forward looking
CPI core goods(b)
t-2 t t+2 t+4 t+6 t+8 t+10
PPI input prices
Imported consumer goods deflator
CIPS — costs(c)
Manufacturing wages
Whole-economy unit labour costs
CIPS — prices(c)
PPI output prices
CBI — reported(d)
Agents’ scores — manufacturing(e)
CBI — expected(d)
BCC — expected(d)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
+
–
Quarters
Chart 4.6 Supply chain indicators lead CPI goods inflation
Correlation between CPI inflation and manufacturing supply chain
indicators(a)
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, Markit/CIPS, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Correlations calculated between 2001 and 2015 Q1. Calculated using percentage changes on a year
earlier, unless otherwise stated. The ‘t’ column contains contemporaneous correlations, cells to the
right of this column contain the correlations between the indicator and future values of CPI core
goods inflation at the indicated number of quarters, while cells to the left contain correlations
between the indicator and past values of CPI core goods inflation.
(b) CPI goods excluding food, non-alcoholic beverages, energy, clothing and footwear and Bank staff
estimates of the impact of changes to VAT.
(c) Diffusion index.
(d) Net percentage balance.
(e) Agents’ scores are for the previous three months relative to the same period a year earlier. Scores
range from -5 to +5, with a score of zero indicating no change.
28 Inflation Report August 2015
Measures of underlying inflation
The MPC’s objective is to meet a target of 2% headline CPI
inflation. From month to month, however, headline inflation
can be volatile, and over longer periods it can be moved
around by factors that do not reflect the general trend in
prices in the economy. Since monetary policy affects inflation
with a lag, responding to temporary deviations from target can
increase economic volatility in unnecessary and undesirable
ways. It is therefore useful to distinguish between temporary
influences on inflation — such as past falls in oil prices — and
those with more persistent effects — such as import prices or
the remaining degree of spare capacity in the economy.
Since the end of 2013, CPI inflation has fallen by 2 percentage
points, to around zero, and a key question is the extent to
which the current low level of inflation will be persistent. This
box discusses some of the measures that shed light on the
drivers of inflation and their likely persistence.
Measures of core CPI inflation
One way to determine whether movements in inflation are
temporary or persistent is to exclude the items that tend to
see significant volatility in their prices, such as food and
energy. Another is to use a measure of CPI that puts less
weight on extreme or erratic movements in prices, for
example by reducing the weight on components that have
historically been more volatile. Measures that focus on these
narrower concepts of inflation are often referred to as ‘core’
inflation.
Many measures of core inflation in the United Kingdom have
fallen markedly since the beginning of 2013, albeit by less than
headline inflation (Chart A). This suggests that, while some of
the weakness in inflation can be attributed to changes in the
prices of a few components, factors that influence the
inflation rate of a large number of components have also been
important. One such factor will have been the recent fall in
import prices (Section 4.2), which could have a broad-based
and relatively persistent impact on CPI inflation. While it is
not possible to calculate precisely the role that import prices
have had in the fall in inflation, much of the recent fall in CPI
inflation has been driven by a combination of energy and
those goods and services with a relatively high share of
imports (Chart B). In contrast, the contribution from those
goods and services with a lower share of imports has been
more stable. This suggests that some of the decline in core
inflation measures does indeed reflect the lower price of
imports.
Other measures of underlying inflation
Another potential factor behind the recent fall in inflation
could have been a weakening in domestic cost growth. It is,
therefore, useful to consider measures of inflation that
attempt to capture the rate at which only domestic costs and
profit margins are changing, so-called ‘domestically generated
inflation’ (DGI). While DGI is not directly observable, there
are measures that are closely linked to DGI such as the rates
of growth of unit labour costs or the GDP deflator.
While these DGI measures are volatile, an average suggests
that DGI fell in 2010, and has remained relatively subdued but
stable since then (Chart C). This provides further evidence
that the recent falls in headline and core inflation measures
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1997 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Range of core CPI measures(a)
CPI
+
–
Chart A Measures of core inflation have fallen
Measures of core CPI inflation
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Swathe includes measures of CPI, adjusted by Bank staff for changes in VAT, excluding:
energy and food; food, non-alcoholic beverages and energy; food, non-alcoholic beverages,
alcohol, energy and tobacco; food, non-alcoholic beverages, alcohol, energy, tobacco and
education. It also includes the median inflation rate of the 85 CPI sub-components and a
measure where component weights in CPI are multiplied by the inverse of the past volatility
of that component. Where series have been adjusted for VAT, there is uncertainty around
the precise impact of the changes in VAT in 2008, 2010 and 2011 on CPI.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Energy(b)
40%+
30–40%
20–30%
10–20%
0–10% CPI inflation (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart B Lower energy and import prices have pulled
down inflation
Contributions to CPI inflation by direct import intensity(a)
(a) ONS calculations. Direct import intensities have been estimated by the ONS using the
2010 Input-Output Analytical Tables. It does not include the effect of goods and services that
are imported and used as inputs domestically. As imports data are provided on a basis that is
not directly comparable to the COICOP classification of the CPI, these estimates should be
regarded as indicative.
(b) Includes fuels and lubricants, electricity, gas, solid fuels and liquid fuels.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 29
are unlikely to have been driven by a significant weakening in
domestic inflation.
What can we learn from these measures about current
CPI inflation?
As required by its remit, the MPC aims to meet a target of 2%
headline CPI inflation. While measures of underlying inflation
— such as core inflation and DGI — are not inflation rates that
the MPC targets, they can be useful for understanding the
drivers and dynamics of inflation.
Currently, measures of core and domestically generated
inflation suggest that some of the current weakness in UK CPI
inflation is due to volatile components, such as food and
energy prices. Lower import prices have also been an
important factor, and are likely to be a more persistent drag
on headline CPI inflation. While domestic cost growth appears
subdued, indicators of this have remained broadly stable over
recent years.
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Average of DGI measures
Range of DGI measures(a)
+
–
Chart C Domestically generated inflation remains
subdued but stable
Measures of domestically generated inflation
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Includes: whole-economy unit labour costs (as defined in footnote (a) of Chart 4.7), private
sector unit wage costs (private sector AWE divided by private sector output), the GDP
deflator, the GDP deflator excluding government and the services producer prices index.
— tend to affect CPI relatively quickly, while the prices of
imported consumer goods — which have been rising — tend to
take longer. The speed at which import prices affect consumer
services prices will vary: some, such as package holidays, tend
to be reflected in the CPI relatively quickly, while others are
likely to take longer. Overall, import prices are likely to bear
down on inflation for some time (Section 5).
Domestically produced food prices also tend to be closely
linked to the price of imported food, in part because imports
are used as inputs, and also due to competition from foreign
producers. Lower imported and domestically produced food
prices, along with the intensification of competition among
UK supermarkets, have meant that retail food prices
subtracted around 0.2 percentage points from inflation in June
(Chart 4.2), and recent falls in imported food prices suggest
that the outlook remains subdued.
4.3 Supply chain pressures
Businesses use raw materials, energy, imported goods and
services, together with capital and labour, to produce the
goods and services that are sold to consumers. Consumer
prices, therefore, will depend on how these costs flow through
the supply chain, together with the profit margin that
businesses add to those costs. Labour costs constitute around
40% of total costs for companies, and are a key driver of
inflation, particularly for consumer services, which in turn
make up around 47% of the CPI basket. Consumer goods —
excluding food, energy, and clothing and footwear —
constitute another one third of the CPI basket and, since many
of these goods are manufactured in the United Kingdom to
some degree, manufacturing output prices are important
Productivity
Non-wage labour costs per head
Wages, salaries and self-employment
 income per head(b)
Unit labour costs (per cent)
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 4.7 Four-quarter unit labour cost growth
probably picked up in 2015 Q2
Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy unit labour cost
growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Unit labour costs are calculated as total labour costs divided by GDP, based on the backcast
of the final estimate of GDP. Estimates are consistent with Bank staff’s estimates of
population growth. The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2015 Q2.
(b) Self-employment income is calculated from mixed income, assuming that the share of
employment income in that is the same as the share of employee compensation in nominal
GDP less mixed income.
30 Inflation Report August 2015
determinants of inflation in this sector. Indeed, many indicators
of manufacturing costs and prices are correlated with future
developments in CPI core goods inflation (as indicated by the
red cells in Chart 4.6).
Unit labour costs
While there have been some signs of a pickup in wage growth
(Section 3), the extent to which this increases the labour cost of
producing a unit of output will depend on the degree to which it
is matched by higher productivity. Four-quarter growth in
whole-economy unit labour costs was lower than expected in
2015 Q1, remaining at 0.6% (Chart 4.7). This was, in part,
because four-quarter growth in the National Accounts measure
of overall wages, salaries and self-employment income per head
fell slightly to 3.0%, lower than had been expected. Non-wage
costs were also weak, remaining lower than a year earlier, and
productivity growth was slightly stronger than had been
expected (Section 3). Four-quarter unit labour cost growth is
expected to have picked up to 1.3% in 2015 Q2, and to
strengthen further over the remainder of 2015, as the drag from
non-wage costs eases.
Some components of overall labour costs, however, may be
more important for consumer prices than others. For example,
private sector pay will form a larger share of costs for companies
providing consumer goods and services. In addition, changes in
non-wage costs can often be erratic, so may not have a direct
bearing on pricing decisions. Private sector unit wage costs
based on the AWE measure of pay grew by a little under 2% in
the four quarters to 2015 Q1, and are expected to grow at a
similar rate on average over the rest of 2015.
Manufacturing cost pressures
On average over the past, it has taken around one to two years
for changes in producer output prices to pass through to the
retail prices of consumer goods (Chart 4.6). Producer output
prices have fallen over the past year, in part reflecting lower
energy prices (Section 4.2). But even excluding energy, prices
have been little changed recently (Chart 4.8), and, Bank staff
expect only a small increase in core goods inflation over the next
few months, which would add around 0.2 percentage points to
inflation. According to industry surveys — which tend to lead
changes in producer prices — there is little sign of cost pressures
further up the manufacturing supply chain either (Chart 4.9),
although as unit labour cost growth strengthens, it could put
upward pressure on inflation in this sector.
Companies’ margins and the outlook for consumer
prices
The extent to which cost pressures feed through to consumer
prices will depend on whether competitive pressures cause
companies to keep prices low or demand growth (Section 2)
instead allows them to raise margins. In aggregate, companies’
profit margins appear to be around their past average
(Chart 4.10), but some companies may use the opportunity of
weak cost pressures to build higher margins.
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1998 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Three-month on three-month percentage changes
CPI goods, excluding food, energy
 and clothing and footwear
(b)
Producer output prices, twelve months earlier
(a)
Projection(c)
+
–
Chart 4.8 Producer prices suggest a slight pickup in
consumer goods inflation
CPI goods and producer output prices
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Net sector output prices for all manufacturing excluding food, beverages, tobacco and
petroleum. Seasonally adjusted by Bank staff.
(b) Excludes food, non-alcoholic beverages, energy, clothing and footwear and Bank staff
estimates of the effect of VAT.
(c) Based on Bank staff projections for near-term CPI inflation.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Percentage changes on a year earlier
PPI output prices(a)
Range of survey
 indicators(b)
+
–
Chart 4.9 Survey indicators imply little pressure on
producer prices
Indicators of manufacturing output prices
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, Markit/CIPS, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Net sector output prices for all manufacturing excluding food, beverages, tobacco and
petroleum.
(b) Measures included are based on surveys of manufacturing output prices from the Bank’s
regional Agents, BCC, CBI and Markit/CIPS. Scaled to match the mean and variance of the
four-quarter change in PPI output prices, excluding food and fuel, since 2000.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 31
Overall, indicators of supply chain pressures appear subdued.
The prices of food, energy and other goods are projected
not to change significantly, but as past falls in these prices
drop out of the annual comparison that will add around
1 percentage point to inflation. Further out, a tightening in the
labour market is likely to put upward pressure on unit labour
costs and inflation, consistent with inflation rising back to the
2% target within the next two years (Section 5).
4.4 Inflation expectations
The persistence of below-target CPI inflation will depend, in
part, on inflation expectations, an important influence on
households’ and companies’ spending, and wage and
price-setting decisions. The MPC monitors a range of
indicators to assess whether inflation expectations are well
anchored.
Some measures of short-term inflation expectations picked up
in Q2, although many of the household measures remain
below their historical averages (Table 4.C). Those would,
however, be expected to respond to actual inflation and the
near-term inflation outlook, which both remain low.
Longer-term inflation expectations are potentially more
informative when judging whether expectations remain well
anchored. The average of expectations of professional
forecasters at the two to three-year horizon is unchanged
since May, remaining consistent with its historical average
(Table 4.C). Measures derived from financial market prices,
such as from swaps, rose in Q2 and increased further in July,
but also remain close to their historical averages. The weight
that financial market participants appear to place on future
deflation has fallen (Section 1).
Measures of longer-term household inflation expectations
remain below their historical averages. While both the
Bank/GfK and the YouGov/Citigroup measures were broadly
unchanged in Q2, the Barclays Basix five-year measure fell
markedly. As set out in a recent Quarterly Bulletin article,
however, these lower household inflation expectations do not,
as yet, appear to have materially affected wage growth,
consumer spending or CPI inflation.(1) Furthermore, the
YouGov/Citigroup measure ticked up in July.
Overall, the MPC judges that inflation expectations remain
well anchored, although there remains a risk that lower
expectations affect wage and price-setting decisions, causing
low inflation to be more persistent. The MPC will continue to
monitor these measures of expectations closely.
(1) See Domit, S, Jackson, C and Roberts-Sklar, M (2015), ‘Do inflation expectations
currently pose a risk to inflation?’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 55, No. 2,
pages 165–80; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/
2015/q205.pdf.
10
15
20
25
1997 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Recession(a)
Profit share(b)
Average, 1997–2015 Q1
0
Chart 4.10 Companies’ margins appear around normal
Private non-financial corporate profit share (excluding the oil
sector)
(a) A recession is defined as at least two consecutive quarters of falling output (at constant
market prices) estimated using the latest data. The recession is assumed to end once output
begins to rise.
(b) Gross trading profits of PNFCs (excluding continental shelf companies) less the alignment
adjustment divided by nominal gross value added at factor cost.
Table 4.C Indicators of inflation expectations(a)
Per cent 2000 (or start
of series) Averages 2013 2014 2015
to 2007 since
averages(b) 2008 H1 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3(c)
One year ahead inflation expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK 2.4 3.2 3.5 2.7 2.8 2.5 1.9 2.2 n.a.
Barclays Basix 2.8 3.0 2.8 2.4 2.4 1.9 1.7 1.3 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.2 2.1 1.7 1.2 1.2 1.6
Companies (2008 Q2)(e) n.a. 0.5 0.4 0.7 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.3 n.a.
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(f) 2.6 2.7 3.0 2.9 3.0 2.6 2.5 2.6 2.6
Two to three year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK (2009 Q1) n.a. 2.8 3.3 2.7 2.8 2.5 2.1 2.3 n.a.
Barclays Basix 3.2 3.2 3.2 2.8 2.7 2.3 2.2 1.7 n.a.
Professional forecasters
(2006 Q2)(g) 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(h) 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.0 2.9 3.1 3.2
Five to ten year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK (2009 Q1) n.a. 3.2 3.6 3.1 3.4 3.0 2.8 2.8 n.a.
Barclays Basix (2008 Q3) n.a. 3.7 3.8 3.7 3.8 3.1 3.4 2.8 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 3.5 3.3 3.5 3.0 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.6 2.8
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(i) 3.0 3.5 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.3 3.1 3.3 3.4
Memo: CPI inflation 1.6 2.7 2.6 1.7 1.5 0.9 0.1 0.0 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Bloomberg, CBI (all rights reserved), Citigroup, GfK, ONS, YouGov
and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Dates in parentheses indicate start date of the data series.
(c) Financial markets data are averages from 1 July to 29 July 2015. YouGov/Citigroup data are for July.
(d) The household surveys ask about expected changes in prices but do not reference a specific price index, and
the measures are based on the median estimated price change.
(e) CBI data for the manufacturing, business/consumer services and distribution sectors, weighted together using
nominal shares in value added. Companies are asked about the expected percentage price change over the
coming twelve months in the markets in which they compete.
(f) Instantaneous RPI inflation one year ahead implied from swaps.
(g) Bank’s survey of external forecasters, inflation rate three years ahead.
(h) Instantaneous RPI inflation three years ahead implied from swaps.
(i) Five-year, five-year forward RPI inflation implied from swaps.
32 Inflation Report August 2015
5 Prospects for inflation
CPI inflation was 0.0% in June, well below the MPC’s 2% target. That undershoot largely reflects
external factors but domestic cost pressures have also been weak. Inflation is projected to rise
around the turn of the year as past falls in energy prices begin to drop out of the annual
comparison. Thereafter, domestic pressures are likely to build alongside a steady expansion in
demand, which absorbs the remaining economic slack. The MPC judges that it is currently
appropriate to set policy so that it is likely that inflation will return to the 2% target within
two years. Conditional on a gradual rise in Bank Rate, such as that currently implied by market
yields, that is judged likely to be achieved.
Since the May Report, UK activity has continued to expand.
Growth was solid in Q2 after a weak Q1 and, following
revisions, growth over the past year was stronger than thought
three months ago. CPI inflation has remained close to zero, as
expected, and most measures of core inflation are around 1%.
As set out in the Governor’s letter to the Chancellor, around
three quarters of the weakness in headline inflation relative to
the 2% target reflects unusually low contributions from
energy, food and other imported goods prices.(1) The
remaining part of the undershoot is judged to reflect relatively
weak domestic cost growth, given a continuing, albeit
declining, drag from slack. Domestic cost growth has
remained subdued since the May Report, as productivity has
strengthened alongside pay growth.
The MPC’s projections are conditioned on a higher exchange
rate and a slightly steeper path for Bank Rate than those in the
May Report. The conditioning path for Bank Rate rises from
early 2016 to reach 1.7% by 2018 Q3 (Table 5.A),(2) around
¼ percentage point higher than in May. The sterling effective
exchange rate has risen by a further 3½%, and is now 20%
above its 2013 trough. Conditional on that path for Bank Rate
and a broadly flat exchange rate, four-quarter GDP growth is
likely to fall back from rates seen in 2014, and settle a little
above 2½% (Chart 5.1). Output grows slightly faster than
potential supply so that the degree of remaining slack is
absorbed and cost growth picks up. CPI inflation returns to the
2% target within two years before rising a little above it in the
Table 5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates(a)
Per cent
 2015 2016 2017 2018
 Q3(b)
 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
August 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.7
May 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.4
(a) The data are fifteen working day averages of one-day forward rates to 29 July 2015 and 7 May 2015
respectively. The curve is based on overnight index swap rates.
(b) August figure for 2015 Q3 is an average of realised spot rates to 29 July 2015, and forward rates thereafter.
(1) That letter can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/
pdf/cpiletter060815.pdf.
(2) Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on:
Bank Rate following a path implied by market yields; a constant stock of asset
purchases; the Recommendations of the Financial Policy Committee and the current
regulatory plans of the Prudential Regulation Authority; the Government’s tax and
spending plans as set out in the Summer Budget 2015; commodity prices following
market paths; and the sterling exchange rate remaining broadly stable. The main
assumptions are set out in a table at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/inflationreport/2015/augca.pdf.
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
ONS data
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. To the left of the
vertical dashed line, the distribution reflects the likelihood of revisions to the data over the past;
to the right, it reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If economic
circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective
judgement is that the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within the darkest central band
on only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to
lie within each pair of the lighter green areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the
forecast period, GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of
100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP growth can fall anywhere
outside the green area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the
light grey background. See the box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a
fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
Chart 5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 33
third year (Chart 5.2), as sustained growth leads to a degree of
excess demand. Both those projections are very similar to
those in the May Report in the medium term (Chart 5.4).
The projections for growth and inflation are underpinned by
four key judgements. First, moderate global growth continues
as international risks are contained. Risks to global growth are
judged to be skewed moderately to the downside reflecting,
for example, risks to growth in the euro area and China.
Second, UK private domestic demand grows robustly,
supported by sustained real income growth and a gradual
decline in private sector savings. That allows UK GDP to grow
close to past average rates, despite the modest global
backdrop and the continuing fiscal consolidation.
Sustained real income growth in turn relies on a third key
judgement that wage growth will continue to rise, reaching
just over 4%, underpinned by an absorption of slack and
strengthening in productivity growth. Productivity growth has
picked up in the latest data, but there is uncertainty about how
much of a signal to take from that following a sustained period
of weakness. The fourth key judgement is that the drag on
inflation from external factors dissipates, as stronger domestic
cost growth returns inflation to the 2% target. There is,
though, particular uncertainty about how much and for how
long the appreciation of sterling will weigh on UK inflation.
In light of the economic outlook, at its meeting ending on
5 August the MPC voted to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5% and
the stock of purchased assets at £375 billion. The factors
behind that decision are set out in the Monetary policy
summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail in the
minutes of the meeting.(1)
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest
rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.3 CPI inflation projection in May based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 depict the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. They have been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves
remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie
within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan charts are constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter red areas on 30 occasions. In any particular
quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall anywhere outside the red area of the
fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the light grey background. See the box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
(1) The minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2015/aug.pdf.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Q3
Probability of inflation at or below
the target, inverted (per cent)
Probability of inflation
above the target (per cent)
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
2015 16 17 18
August
May
Chart 5.4 Inflation probabilities relative to the target
The August and May swathes in this chart are derived from the same distributions as Charts 5.2
and 5.3 respectively. They indicate the assessed probability of inflation relative to the target in
each quarter of the forecast period. The 5 percentage points width of the swathes reflects the
fact that there is uncertainty about the precise probability in any given quarter, but they should
not be interpreted as confidence intervals.
34 Inflation Report August 2015
5.1 Key judgements and risks
The Committee’s four key judgements are described in more
detail below. Table 5.B provides projections for variables that
illustrate those judgements; Table 5.C provides a range of
indicators to monitor them; and Table 5.D shows indicative
projections for a range of other variables.
Key Judgement 1: moderate global growth continues as
international risks are contained
The UK economy is sensitive to events elsewhere in the world.
The euro-area recovery has continued, with GDP growth at
0.4% in Q1, as expected, and a similar pace expected in Q2.
The pickup in growth from sluggish rates in 2014 reflects the
boost from lower oil prices, improved credit conditions, a
weaker euro and support from the ECB’s asset purchase
programme. The effects of policy support are expected to
build over the next year or so, taking growth close to 2% in
2016 (Chart 5.5), causing slack gradually to narrow and
helping inflation to pick up from its current low level.
The euro-area growth projection is a touch weaker in the near
term than three months ago. That largely reflects downward
revisions to the outlook for Greek activity, following the
imposition of capital and banking controls. The risks of a
disorderly outcome in Greece in the near term are judged to
have fallen. Agreeing and implementing a sustainable
solution, including debt relief measures, will, however, be
challenging. A disorderly outcome still presents a downside
risk to euro-area and UK activity over the forecast period.
US output growth rose in Q2, following weakness in Q1. The
labour market has continued to tighten, with unemployment
falling further. The projection is conditioned on a
market-implied path for the federal funds rate, which rises
from the turn of the year. Growth continues under those
conditions, although at a somewhat slower rate than before
the crisis (Table 5.B). Risks remain to that outlook. Recent
weakness in productivity growth could persist, or alternatively
unwind more quickly than the gentle rise assumed. There is
also uncertainty about the impact of a rise in US interest rates.
For example, while a rise is widely anticipated, it could
nonetheless be associated with financial market volatility in
the United States and elsewhere.
China has recently experienced significant equity market
volatility. Following a 150% rise over the preceding year,
equity prices have fallen around 30% since mid-June
(Section 1). These falls are associated with a slightly weaker
outlook for Chinese activity, largely reflecting an assumed
small hit to confidence. Overall, annual Chinese growth is
projected to slow further, to around 6¼% by 2017, as
policymakers continue their efforts to rebalance the economy
away from external demand and investment towards
Table 5.B MPC key judgements(a)(b)
Key Judgement 1: moderate global growth continues as international risks are
contained
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017
World GDP (UK-weighted)(c) 3 2¼ (2¼) 2¾ (2¾) 2¾ (2¾)
World GDP (PPP-weighted)(d) 4 3¼ (3¼) 3¾ (3¾) 3½ (3¾)
Euro-area GDP(e) 2¼ 1½ (1½) 1¾ (2) 1¾ (2)
US GDP(f) 3 2½ (2½) 2¾ (2½) 2¼ (2¼)
Key Judgement 2: private domestic demand grows robustly, supported by sustained
real income growth and a gradual decline in private sector savings
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017
Credit spreads(g) ¾(h) 2 (2) 2 (2) 2 (2)
Household saving ratio(i) 8¾ 5¼ (6¼) 5 (6) 4½ (5½)
Business investment to
GDP ratio(j) 10 10¾ (10½) 11¼ (11) 12 (11¾)
Key Judgement 3: wage growth continues to rise, underpinned by an absorption of
slack and strengthening in productivity growth
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017
Productivity(k) 2¼ 1 (¼) 1 (1¼) 1½ (1¾)
Participation rate(l) 63 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½)
Average hours(m)
 32¼ 32¼ (32¼) 32½ (32½) 32¼ (32¼)
Key Judgement 4: the drag on inflation from external factors dissipates, as stronger
domestic cost growth returns inflation to the 2% target
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017
UK import prices(n) ¼ -5½ (-4¾) ¾ (1¼) ¾ (¾)
Unit labour costs(o) 2¾ 2 (1½) 3 (3) 3 (2¾)
Dollar oil price(p) 39 57 (68) 62 (71) 66 (73)
Sources: Bank of England, BDRC Continental SME Finance Monitor, Bloomberg, BofA Merrill Lynch Global
Research, used with permission, British Household Panel Survey, Department for Business, Innovation and Skills,
Eurostat, IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) The MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts) are
underpinned by four key judgements. The mapping from the key judgements to individual variables is not
precise, but the profiles in the table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s key judgements.
(b) Figures show calendar-year growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the May 2015 Inflation Report.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 146 countries weighted according
to their shares in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 147 countries weighted according
to their shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e) Chained-volume measure.
(f) Chained-volume measure.
(g) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(h) Based on the weighted average of spreads for households and large companies over 2003 and 2004 relative
to the level in 2007 Q3. Data used to construct the SME spread are not available for that period. The
period is chosen as broadly representative of one where spreads were neither unusually tight nor unusually
loose.
(i) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources.
(j) Calendar-year average. Chained-volume business investment as a percentage of GDP.
(k) GDP per hour worked. GDP at market prices is based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Hours worked
have been adjusted for expected revisions to the ONS population estimates to incorporate the latest data
on net migration.
(l) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population.
(m) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job.
(n) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4. Excludes the impact of missing trader intra-community fraud.
(o) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at
market prices, based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation
of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
(p) Average level in Q4. Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 35
household spending. There remains considerable uncertainty
around how smooth that rebalancing will be.
UK-weighted world output is projected to expand at a
moderate pace, with growth in both advanced and emerging
economies a little below pre-crisis average rates (Table 5.B).
Relative to the past few years, however, growth in the
advanced economies is a touch faster, while growth in China
and some other emerging economies is slower. The MPC
judges the risks to the global growth outlook to be skewed
moderately to the downside.
The share of world demand that UK exporters can attain over
the forecast period will be constrained by the marked rise in
sterling over the past two years. The rise in sterling also
The Committee’s projections are underpinned by four key
judgements. Risks surround all of these, and the MPC will
monitor a broad range of variables to understand the degree
to which the risks are crystallising. The table below shows
Bank staff’s indicative near-term projections that are
consistent with the judgements in the MPC’s central view
evolving as expected.
Table 5.C Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements
Key judgement Likely developments in 2015 Q3 to 2016 Q1 if judgements evolve as expected
1: moderate global growth
continues as international risks
are contained
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average around ½%.
• Euro-area inflation is expected to remain weak in the coming months, but will begin to pick up towards
the end of the year.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a little below ¾%; non-farm payrolls to increase by around
250,000 per month.
• Indicators of activity consistent with four-quarter PPP-weighted emerging-economy growth of around
4¼% on average; within that, Chinese GDP growth to average around 6½%.
• Average quarterly growth in UK exports of slightly below ½%.
2: private domestic demand
grows robustly, supported by
sustained real income growth
and a gradual decline in private
sector savings
• Quarterly consumption growth a little above ¾%.
• Saving ratio of 5½% by 2016 Q1.
• Credit spreads to decline slightly.
• A rise in mortgage approvals for house purchase to around 70,000 a month, on average, in 2015 Q4.
• Rates of increase in the main indices of national house prices to average just over ½% a month in
2015 Q4 and 2016 Q1.
• Quarterly housing investment growth to average around 1%.
• Quarterly business investment growth of around 1½%.
3: wage growth continues to
rise, underpinned by an
absorption of slack and
strengthening in productivity
growth
• Quarterly hourly labour productivity growth to average a little under ¼%.
• Headline LFS unemployment to fall slightly to 5½% by the end of the year.
• Participation rate to pick up slightly over the rest of the year to a little under 63½%.
• Average hours to increase by around ½% over the rest of the year.
• Four-quarter AWE growth to remain around 3¼% in Q3 before temporarily dipping to 3% in Q4 due
to strong bonuses in 2014 Q4, and reaching 3½% by 2016 Q1.
4: the drag on inflation from
external factors dissipates, as
stronger domestic cost growth
returns inflation to the
2% target
• Four-quarter growth in whole-economy unit labour costs to reach 2% by the end of the year.
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to evolve in line with the conditioning assumptions set out in
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/augca.pdf.
• Petrol and diesel prices to fall by around 4% in Q3.
• Domestic gas prices to fall by 5% by the end of the year. Domestic electricity prices to remain flat.
• Import prices to be broadly flat in 2015 Q4 and 2016 Q1.
• Indicators of inflation expectations continue to be broadly consistent with the 2% target.
36 Inflation Report August 2015
supports UK import growth. Exports are therefore projected
to grow more slowly than imports (Table 5.D), and net trade
drags on growth throughout the forecast period. There
remains considerable uncertainty around how much further
and how rapidly the appreciation will dampen net trade.
Despite the past rise in sterling, the trade deficit in Q2 looks to
have been the smallest relative to GDP since 1998. The
current account deficit is nevertheless likely to have remained
large, reflecting the substantial deficit on primary income as
returns on UK companies’ investments abroad have weakened
and returns on foreign companies’ UK investments have
strengthened. In the central projection, the trade deficit
widens and the income balance remains in significant deficit.
It is possible, however, that as activity in the euro area picks
up, higher returns on foreign investment reduce that deficit,
with an associated boost to private sector income.
Key Judgement 2: private domestic demand grows
robustly, supported by sustained real income growth and a
gradual decline in private sector savings
The United Kingdom is in the middle of a substantial fiscal
consolidation. Given that and below-average support from
the world, GDP can grow at close to past average rates only if
private domestic demand grows at above-average rates.
The Summer Budget 2015 set out how government borrowing
would be reduced in coming years. Although the overall path
of the consolidation was not much changed, a little less of it
takes place during the MPC’s three-year forecast period than
was the case in the May projections, with more happening in
future years. The consolidation includes a number of
measures, including reductions in departmental spending
relative to GDP, cuts in some welfare payments and higher
taxes. These are likely to have differing effects on GDP both in
terms of their initial impact and how long they drag on
demand. For example, a reduction in public investment
reduces GDP directly. The effects of other measures, such as
changes to public sector pay or taxes, may take longer to feed
through and depend on how households and companies react
to changes in their income. The overall drag on activity from
the consolidation is uncertain. It will depend on factors such
as the proportion of people who are credit constrained, and
therefore cannot smooth through changes in their income,
and the extent to which some households and companies have
anticipated the changes and have already adjusted their
spending.
In the household sector, real income growth is projected to
be 2½% in 2015, the highest annual rate since 2007. Some
of that strength reflects a temporary boost from lower oil
prices, while momentum is maintained over the forecast
period thanks to stronger wage growth. There remains
considerable uncertainty around the path for income,
stemming in particular from the risks around productivity
Table 5.D Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections(a)
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017
Household consumption(b) 3¾ 3¼ (2¾) 3¼ (3) 3 (2¾)
Business investment(c)
 2¼ 4¾ (2½) 7¼ (6¾) 8½ (8¼)
Housing investment(d) 3¾ 6½ (1) 4½ (3¼) 4 (5)
Exports(e) 4½ 5½ (4) 2½ (3½) 2½ (3)
Imports(f) 6 4 (4¼) 3¼ (3½) 4 (3½)
Real post-tax household
income(g) 3 2½ (3¼) 3 (2½) 2½ (2¼)
Employment(h)
 1 1¼ (1¾) 1¼ (1) 1 (¾)
Average weekly earnings(i) 4¼ 3 (2½) 3¾ (4) 4¼ (4)
(a) These projections are produced by Bank staff for the MPC to be consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment. Figures show calendar-year growth rates
unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the May 2015
Inflation Report.
(b) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Chained-volume measure.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending
on services associated with the sale and purchase of property.
(e) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC)
fraud. Official MTIC-adjusted data are not available for exports, so headline exports data have been
adjusted by Bank staff for MTIC fraud by an amount equal to the ONS import adjustment.
(f) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of MTIC fraud.
(g) Total available household resources deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(h) Four-quarter growth rate in Q4. Series has been adjusted for expected revisions to the ONS population
estimates to incorporate the latest data on net migration.
(i) Four-quarter growth in Q4 in whole-economy total pay.
+
–
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Projection at the time of the May Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in August
Percentage change on previous year
Sources: Eurostat and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. Chained-volume measure.
Chart 5.5 Euro-area GDP(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 37
growth (Key Judgement 3). Consumption grows just a little
faster (Table 5.D) than income over the forecast period such
that the saving ratio falls gradually (Chart 5.6). That fall is
consistent with less precautionary saving by households, given
a brighter economic outlook and improvements in credit
availability (Section 2). Risks around that path remain in both
directions. For example, there is uncertainty around the
sensitivity of household spending to past improvements in
credit conditions and the gradual rises in Bank Rate that are
assumed to take place over the forecast period.
Some of the factors boosting consumption growth are also
supporting the housing market. In particular, credit conditions
have improved substantially in recent years and mortgage
interest rates are now at or near record lows. After a period of
subdued activity, housing transactions and mortgage
approvals rose in Q2. Approvals were stronger than expected
and are projected to rise further in coming years, albeit to a
lesser extent than anticipated a year or so ago. The latest data
also suggest a stronger picture for housing investment than
three months ago (Section 2) and it is expected to grow at
above-average rates over the forecast period (Table 5.D).
Annual house price inflation was around 7% in Q2, and is
expected to rise a little further in the near term before slowing
towards growth in nominal incomes.
Four-quarter business investment growth has slowed a little
over the recent past though it remains solid, at around 5%.
The outlook for business investment remains strong,
supported by the low real cost of capital, businesses’ relatively
high confidence about demand for their products, and a
growing need to expand capacity. Over the forecast period,
overall business investment is projected to grow by 7%–8% a
year from 2016, despite substantial expected reductions in
capital spending in the oil and gas sector. That growth is
associated with an increasing financial deficit as companies
increase borrowing or spend cash balances. There remains a
risk that businesses will be unwilling to increase investment to
the extent assumed in the central projection, especially if
global political or economic uncertainty were to increase.
Key Judgement 3: wage growth continues to rise,
underpinned by an absorption of slack and strengthening
in productivity growth
Since the May Report there has been news in both labour
market quantities and prices. Total hours worked have been
significantly weaker than expected, suggesting a sharp rise in
productivity in Q2, while wage growth has been stronger than
expected. Combining all the evidence, including top-down
measures of slack, which have changed little, the MPC’s best
collective judgement is that slack currently remains in the
region of ½% of GDP, although there remains substantial
uncertainty about that judgement with a range of views
among MPC members. The remaining slack is likely to be
absorbed over the next year or so. Over the forecast period,
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Projection at the time of the May Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in August Per cent
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources.
Chart 5.6 Household saving ratio(a)
38 Inflation Report August 2015
labour supply growth slows and productivity growth picks up
towards its past historical average rate. Together, the
absorption of slack and sustained productivity growth cause
wage growth to rise to a little over 4%.
There remains uncertainty around the current extent of spare
capacity in the economy. At the start of the forecast period,
participation and average hours are lower, and unemployment
higher, than expected three months ago, suggesting a little
more labour market slack. At the same time, survey indicators
of capacity use have strengthened, pointing to less spare
capacity within companies. In the central projection, these are
judged to have broadly offsetting effects on slack. That
judgement is uncertain. Companies’ assessment of normal
capacity may have drifted down during the sustained period of
weak activity. If so, survey responses would understate spare
capacity. Alternatively, if higher household real incomes have
dissuaded some people from working longer hours or potential
second earners from seeking work at all, the recent drop in
employment might be partly structural. In that case there
would be less slack in the labour market than implied in the
central projection. The slowdown in employment growth
might also indicate more mismatch between employment
supply and demand, as the labour market tightens.
The outlook for productivity is also uncertain. While official
data to May suggest that hours worked were unchanged in
Q2, surveys of companies suggest continued labour demand
growth. Hours worked are therefore judged likely to pick up in
Q3, and measured productivity growth to fall back. Even so,
taken together with upward revisions to earlier quarters,
productivity is just over 1% higher than expected
three months ago. Over the forecast period, productivity
growth is expected to rise back slowly towards its long-term
average rate (Chart 5.7). That rise in part reflects an
unwinding of compositional effects — for example,
employment growth being concentrated in lower-skilled roles
with below-average pay and productivity — that are judged to
have held back overall wage and productivity growth over the
past year or so (Section 3). It also reflects the waning impact
of the financial crisis as looser credit conditions and higher
investment help resources to be reallocated towards more
productive uses. The rise in productivity growth is a little
slower than projected three months ago as some of the recent
strength is judged to be cyclical and hence temporary. It is,
however, also possible that the recent data provide a signal
that the long-awaited revival in productivity growth is
happening more rapidly than the Committee has assumed.
The paths for slack and productivity determine the outlook for
wage growth. Four-quarter AWE growth has picked up over
recent quarters from rates of around 1% in 2014 to probably
around 3% in Q2. Although much of the unexpected strength
in wage growth since the May Report reflects bonuses, and so
may be transitory, regular pay growth has also been
Projection at the time of the May Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in August
Percentage change on previous year
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. GDP per hour worked. GDP is at market prices and projections
are based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Hours worked have been adjusted for
expected revisions to the ONS population estimates to incorporate the latest data on net
migration.
Chart 5.7 Productivity(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 39
strengthening. That could, in part, reflect some unwinding of
the compositional effects that are estimated to have pulled
down annual wage growth by around 1 percentage point in the
past year or so (Section 3). With rises in both productivity and
pay, four-quarter unit labour cost growth is likely to have been
subdued in Q2, albeit higher than in 2014. In the central
projection, as slack continues to be absorbed, pay and cost
growth rise to more normal rates (Chart 5.8). That includes a
small uplift to aggregate wage growth reflecting increased pay
for low earners following the introduction of the National
Living Wage (see the box on page 24). Pay and hence unit
labour cost growth could be weaker if current low CPI inflation
affects pay setting by more than assumed, although the
pickup in wage growth suggests that the risk of such an effect
has receded. They could be stronger if companies face
increasing difficulties retaining or attracting staff, as some
surveys indicate.
Key Judgement 4: the drag on inflation from external
factors dissipates, as stronger domestic cost growth
returns inflation to the 2% target
Weakness in domestic labour cost growth has been one factor
bearing down on CPI inflation in recent years. But the main
contributors to low inflation over the past year have been the
falls in prices of oil, food and other traded goods. Much of the
decline in oil prices occurred in late 2014 and the drag on
annual CPI inflation from petrol will get smaller as those
declines drop out of the twelve-month comparison. But the
12% fall in dollar oil prices since May, together with further
reductions in domestic gas prices (Section 4), mean the drag
from domestic energy prices lasts longer than expected
three months ago. There are risks from further moves in
commodity prices, stemming from both the global demand
outlook (Key Judgement 1) and prospects for supply,
particularly in the oil sector (Section 1).
Non-energy import costs are also likely to bear down on
inflation for some time. These depend both on the prices
charged in global markets and on the sterling exchange rate.
Foreign export price inflation has been fairly subdued in recent
years and the exchange rate has appreciated significantly since
2013 (Section 4). Import prices have not, however, fallen by
as much as might have been expected. Given the time that
has now passed since sterling began to rise, the MPC judges
that the earlier appreciation will be associated with somewhat
less of a fall in import prices than previously assumed. The
associated drag on inflation is therefore smaller than in the
May projection. There remains considerable uncertainty,
however, about the impact of sterling’s appreciation both in
terms of its duration as well as its extent. In the central
projection the drag on CPI inflation from lower import prices is
expected to persist for much of the forecast period.
In the central projection, the continuing drag from import
prices is offset by the strength of unit labour cost growth such
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Projection at the time of the May Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in August
Percentage change on a year earlier
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at market prices, based on the mode of
the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation of employees and the
labour share multiplied by mixed income. The chart shows data to 2015 Q1 and projections
for four-quarter growth in Q4 thereafter.
Chart 5.8 Unit labour costs(a)
Table 5.E Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths(a)
 Mode Median Mean
2015(b) 2.8 (2.6) 2.8 (2.5) 2.8 (2.5)
2016(b) 2.7 (2.6) 2.6 (2.6) 2.6 (2.6)
2017 2.6 (2.5) 2.5 (2.4) 2.5 (2.4)
(a) The table shows the projections for calendar-year growth of real GDP consistent with the modal, median
and mean projections for four-quarter growth of real GDP implied by the fan chart. Where growth rates
depend in part on the MPC’s backcast, revisions to quarterly growth are assumed to be independent of the
revisions to previous quarters. The numbers in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the
May Inflation Report. The August and May projections have been conditioned on market interest rates, and
the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains
at £375 billion throughout the forecast period.
(b) The anticipated revisions to recent estimates of quarterly GDP growth has implications for calendar-year
growth in 2015. Without the anticipated revisions to past GDP growth, the modal path of the Committee’s
August projections would imply calendar-year growth of 2.6% in 2015 rather than 2.8%.
Table 5.F Q4 CPI inflation
 Mode Median Mean
2015 Q4 0.4 (0.7) 0.3 (0.7) 0.3 (0.6)
2016 Q4 1.6 (1.7) 1.5 (1.6) 1.5 (1.6)
2017 Q4 2.1 (2.1) 2.1 (2.1) 2.1 (2.1)
The table shows projections for Q4 four-quarter CPI inflation. The numbers in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the May Inflation Report. The August and May projections have been conditioned
on market interest rates, and the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period.
40 Inflation Report August 2015
that inflation returns to the 2% target within two years, before
rising a little above it in the third year. The MPC judges that
inflation expectations remain well anchored and companies’
price and wage-setting decisions are not significantly affected
by the period of below-target inflation. Although some
measures of household inflation expectations remain below
their past averages, financial market measures have risen since
May and are back around their past average rates.
5.2 The projections for demand,
unemployment and inflation
Based on these judgements and the risks around them, and
under the conditioning path for Bank Rate based on market
yields, which rises to 1.7% by 2018 Q3, the Committee judges
that four-quarter GDP growth is likely to fall back from rates
seen in 2014, and settle a little above 2½% (Table 5.E). Over
the forecast period, growth is supported by robust private
spending, particularly investment, against a modest global
backdrop and a further fiscal consolidation. The MPC judges
the risks to the projection to be weighted moderately to the
downside throughout the forecast period (Chart 5.9),
reflecting the possibility of weaker global demand. Overall,
the projection is broadly similar to that of three months ago,
despite a higher path for Bank Rate and the sterling ERI. That
is because the impact of these has been offset by other factors
including a slightly smaller drag from the fiscal consolidation
and modestly lower credit spreads.
The MPC’s projections are underpinned by a gradual return to
more normal rates of productivity growth. That is associated
with slowing employment growth and only a modest further
fall in unemployment. In the central projection,
unemployment starts the projection a little above that in May
but, as the level of productivity returns towards its May path,
ends it at a similar level, a little below the assumed long-term
equilibrium rate of around 5% (Chart 5.10). Overall, slack is
projected to be absorbed over the forecast period, although
there remains considerable uncertainty about this judgement
with a range of views among MPC members.
CPI inflation is judged likely to remain close to zero in the near
term, before rising around the turn of the year as past falls in
energy prices begin to drop out of the annual comparison. In
the MPC’s best collective judgement, inflation is expected to
rise gradually thereafter, reaching the 2% target within
two years and then rising a little above it. That gradual rise
reflects the build-up of domestic cost pressures and the
waning drag from the past appreciation of sterling, but there
remains uncertainty around both those paths. The MPC
judges that the risks to the projection lie to the downside in
the near term (Chart 5.11), reflecting the possibility that
sterling weighs more on inflation than assumed in the central
projection, but are broadly balanced further ahead. Overall,
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Unemployment rate, per cent
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands have the same interpretation as in Chart 5.2, and portray 90% of the probability
distribution. The calibration of this fan chart takes account of the likely path dependency of the
economy, where, for example, it is judged that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will
continue to have some effect on unemployment in successive quarters. The fan begins in
2015 Q2, a quarter earlier than the fan for CPI inflation. That is because Q2 is a staff projection
for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for April and May. The unemployment rate
was 5.6% in the three months to May, and is projected to be 5.6% in Q2 as a whole. In the later
part of the forecast period, a significant proportion of this distribution lies below Bank staff’s
current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. There is therefore
uncertainty about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Chart 5.10 Unemployment projection based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
– + 0
1
2
3
4
1 01 23456
Probability density, per cent(b)
August
May
(a) Chart 5.9 represents the cross-section of the GDP growth fan chart in 2017 Q3 for the
market interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of
purchased assets remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands in Chart 5.9 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like the fan
charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey outline
represents the corresponding cross-section of the May 2015 Inflation Report fan chart, which
was conditioned on market interest rates and the same assumption about the stock of
purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
growth being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given growth rate, specified to
one decimal place.
Chart 5.9 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in
2017 Q3 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 41
the projection is lower than that three months ago in the near
term, largely reflecting recent falls in energy prices, but
broadly similar further out (Table 5.F).
Charts 5.12 and 5.13, show the MPC’s projections under the
alternative assumption that Bank Rate remains at 0.5%
throughout the forecast period. Under that path growth
would be likely to be a little stronger, and inflation is projected
to move further above the 2% target.
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
ONS data
See footnote to Chart 5.1.
Chart 5.12 GDP projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased assets
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
–
+
Chart 5.13 CPI inflation projection based on constant
nominal interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased
assets
See footnote to Chart 5.2.
0
1
2
3
4
2.0 1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
Probability density, per cent(b)
May
– +
August
Chart 5.11 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in
2016 Q3 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
(a) Chart 5.11 represents the cross-section of the CPI inflation fan chart in 2016 Q3 for the
market interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock
of purchased assets remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands in Chart 5.11 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like the fan
charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey outline
represents the corresponding cross-section of the May 2015 Inflation Report fan chart, which
was conditioned on market interest rates and the same assumption about the stock
of purchased assets.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
inflation being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given inflation rate, specified to one
decimal place.
42 Inflation Report August 2015
Other forecasters’ expectations
Every three months, the Bank asks a sample of external
forecasters for their latest economic projections. This box
reports the results of the most recent survey, carried out in
July.(1) On average, respondents’ expectations for CPI inflation,
GDP growth, Bank Rate and the stock of purchased assets
were broadly similar to those at the time of the May Report.
On average, respondents expected four-quarter GDP growth
to slow to 2.4% in one year’s time, and remain stable over the
following two years (Table 1). That is below the MPC’s central
projection for growth, which slows only gradually to around
2½% at the end of the forecast period.
The average of respondents’ central expectations for
CPI inflation in one year’s time was around 1.7%, somewhat
higher than the MPC’s central projection of 1.3%, which was
close to the bottom of the range of external forecasts
(Chart A). On average, external forecasters thought there was
around a 30% probability that CPI inflation will be above the
target in one year’s time, while that probability was 50% in
three years’ time (Chart B).
The path for Bank Rate implied by the average of forecasters’
central expectations was little changed from May.
Respondents are also asked for the probabilities they would
attach to various possible outcomes for Bank Rate. On
average, respondents continued to attach the largest weight
to Bank Rate being at least 0.5% but less than 1.0% in a year’s
time (Chart C). But there was a greater weight placed on the
possibility that Bank Rate would be 1.0% or higher, than at the
time of the May Report.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
One year ahead
Three years ahead
Per cent
Source: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports between February 2008
and August 2015.
Chart B Even probability of above or below-target
inflation three years ahead
Average probability of above-target CPI inflation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
<0% 0%–
0.5%
0.5%–
1.0%
1.0%–
1.5%
1.5%–
2.0%
2.0%–
2.5%
≥2.5%
Percentages
One year ahead
Two years ahead
Solid lines: August Report
Dashed lines: May Report
Source: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports in May 2015 and
August 2015.
(a) Probabilities on the boundary of these ranges are included in the upper range, eg the
probability of Bank Rate being 1.0% appears in the 1.0%–1.5% range.
Chart C Increased weight on Bank Rate rising to 1% or
more over the next year
Average probability of Bank Rate outturns(a)
Table 1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections(a)
 2016 Q3 2017 Q3 2018 Q3
CPI inflation(b) 1.7 2.0 2.1
GDP growth(c) 2.4 2.4 2.4
LFS unemployment rate 5.0 4.8 4.7
Bank Rate (per cent) 1.0 1.7 2.3
Stock of purchased assets (£ billions)(d) 365 337 301
Sterling ERI 92.1 90.5 88.4
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 21 July 2015.
(a) For 2016 Q3, there were 23 forecasts for CPI inflation, GDP growth and Bank Rate, 22 for the
unemployment rate, 13 for the stock of asset purchases and 11 for the sterling ERI. For both 2017 Q3 and
2018 Q3, there were 19 forecasts for CPI inflation, GDP growth and Bank Rate, 18 for the unemployment
rate, 11 for the stock of asset purchases and 9 for the sterling ERI.
(b) Twelve-month rate.
(c) Four-quarter percentage change.
(d) Original purchase value. Purchased via the creation of central bank reserves.
0
1
2
3
4
2016 Q3 2017 Q3 2018 Q3
Percentage increases in prices on a year earlier
MPC modal projection
Interquartile range of external forecasters
Range of external forecasters
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 21 July 2015.
Chart A Most external forecasters expect higher
inflation than the MPC in one year’s time
Forecasters’ central projections of CPI inflation
(1) For detailed distributions of other forecasters’ expectations, see ‘Other forecasters’
expectations’ on the Bank’s website, available at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/augofe.pdf.
 Index of charts and tables 43
Index of charts and tables
Charts
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.1 International ten-year government bond yields 1
1.2 UK-weighted world GDP and world trade 2
1.3 Euro-area consumer and business confidence measures 3
1.4 US wage growth and unemployment rate 3
1.5 US dollar oil and commodity prices 4
1.6 Option-implied weight on deflation three years ahead 5
1.7 International forward interest rates 5
1.8 Implied volatilities from three-month options on
ten-year interest rate swaps 6
1.9 Five-year, five-year forward implied inflation rates 6
1.10 Estimates of contributions to changes in ten-year
government bond yields between end-October 2014
and end-June 2015 7
1.11 International equity prices 7
1.12 Euro-denominated non-financial corporate bond
issuance 8
1.13 UK banks’ indicative long-term funding spreads 8
1.14 Sterling exchange rates 8
2 Demand and output 10
2.1 Bank staff projections for near-term output growth 11
2.2 Household consumption 12
2.3 Household deposit and unsecured lending interest rates 12
2.4 Unsecured loans to individuals 12
2.5 Average quoted mortgage interest rates 13
2.6 Mortgage approvals and housing transactions 13
2.7 Contributions to four-quarter private housing
investment growth 14
2.8 Investment intention surveys and business investment 14
2.9 Goods exports and survey indicators 15
2.10 UK current account 15
2.11 Mapping between expenditure components and
output sectors 17
2.12 Imports relative to import-weighted demand 17
The fiscal consolidation 16
A Public sector net borrowing 16
B Changes to the fiscal consolidation announced in the
Summer Budget 2015 16
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.1 Decomposition of four-quarter GDP growth 19
3.2 Contributions to annual population growth 20
3.3 Participation rate and Bank staff estimates of the
medium-term equilibrium participation rate 20
3.4 Bank staff’s near-term unemployment rate projection 21
3.5 Flows from unemployment to employment and
job-to-job flows 22
3.6 Unemployment rates by duration 22
3.7 Average weekly hours: actual, desired and
Bank staff’s estimate of medium-term equilibrium 22
3.8 Survey indicators of capacity utilisation 23
3.9 Estimates of the contribution of employment
characteristics to four-quarter wage growth 23
3.10 Private sector earnings and indicators of pay growth 24
4 Costs and prices 25
4.1 Bank staff projection for near-term CPI inflation 25
4.2 Contributions to CPI inflation 26
4.3 Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices 26
4.4 UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel 27
4.5 Import price inflation by category 27
4.6 Correlation between CPI inflation and manufacturing
supply chain indicators 27
4.7 Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy
unit labour cost growth 29
4.8 CPI goods and producer output prices 30
4.9 Indicators of manufacturing output prices 30
4.10 Private non-financial corporate profit share
(excluding the oil sector) 31
Measures of underlying inflation 28
A Measures of core CPI inflation 28
B Contributions to CPI inflation by direct import
intensity 28
C Measures of domestically generated inflation 29
5 Prospects for inflation 32
5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 32
5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 33
5.3 CPI inflation projection in May based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased
assets 33
5.4 Inflation probabilities relative to the target 33
5.5 Euro-area GDP 36
5.6 Household saving ratio 37
5.7 Productivity 38
5.8 Unit labour costs 39
5.9 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in 2017 Q3
(central 90% of the distribution) 40
5.10 Unemployment projection based on market interest
rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 40
5.11 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in 2016 Q3
(central 90% of the distribution) 41
5.12 GDP projection based on constant nominal interest
rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased assets 41
5.13 CPI inflation projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased
assets 41
Other forecasters’ expectations 42
A Forecasters’ central projections of CPI inflation 42
B Average probability of above-target CPI inflation 42
C Average probability of Bank Rate outturns 42
44 Inflation Report August 2015
Tables
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 1
1.B GDP in selected countries and regions 2
1.C Inflation rates in selected countries and regions 2
1.D Selected European ten-year spot government bond
spreads 6
2 Demand and output 10
2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 10
2.B Expenditure components of demand 11
2.C Income, consumption and saving 13
2.D Net external finance raised by PNFCs 14
2.E GDP and sectoral output 18
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 19
3.B Employment growth, vacancies and survey
indicators of employment intentions 21
3.C Whole-economy earnings 23
4 Costs and prices 25
4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 25
4.B Contributions to June 2015 CPI inflation relative
to pre-crisis average 26
4.C Indicators of inflation expectations 31
5 Prospects for inflation 32
5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates 32
5.B MPC key judgements 34
5.C Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements 35
5.D Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s
modal projections 36
5.E Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths 39
5.F Q4 CPI inflation 39
Other forecasters’ expectations 42
1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections 42
 Press Notices 45
Text of Bank of England press notice of 4 June 2015
Bank of England maintains Bank Rate at 0.5% and the size of the Asset Purchase Programme at
£375 billion
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee at its meeting on 3 June voted to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5%. The Committee also voted
to maintain the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves at £375 billion.
The minutes of the meeting will be published at 9.30 am on Wednesday 17 June.
Text of Bank of England press notice of 9 July 2015
Bank of England maintains Bank Rate at 0.5% and the size of the Asset Purchase Programme at
£375 billion
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee at its meeting on 8 July voted to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5%. The Committee also voted to
maintain the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves at £375 billion.
The minutes of the meeting will be published at 9.30 am on Wednesday 22 July.
46 Inflation Report August 2015
Glossary and other information
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CDS – credit default swap.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices
index.
DGI – domestically generated inflation.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
PPI – producer price index.
RPI – retail prices index.
RPI inflation – inflation measured by the retail prices index.
Abbreviations
BCC – British Chambers of Commerce.
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CEIC – CEIC Data Company Ltd.
CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
COICOP – Classification of Individual Consumption by
Purpose.
ECB – European Central Bank.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
LTV – loan to value.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
NLW – National Living Wage.
OBR – Office for Budget Responsibility.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
PNFCs – private non-financial corporations.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
PwC – PricewaterhouseCoopers.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SMEs – small and medium-sized enterprises.
VAT – Value Added Tax.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Symbols and conventions
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in
charts and tables is the Bank of England or the Office for
National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from financial
markets data, are seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may
sometimes differ from the total shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first
observation within the relevant period, eg data for the first
quarter of the year.

© Bank of England 2015
ISSN 1353-6737
Printed by Park Communications Limited