Inflation Report
August 2016
On 11 August 2016, the text on page vii describing contributions to defined benefit pension schemes was corrected from ‘the past
two decades’ to ‘the past decade’, in line with the text on page 12 of the Report.
On 9 August 2016, the May Inflation Report projection for UK-weighted World GDP growth in 2017, shown in parentheses in
Table 5.E, was corrected from 2 to 2½, in line with that published in the May Report.
On 5 August 2016, the text describing Chart B on page v was corrected from describing ‘mortgagors’ to ‘mortgages by value’ to
align with the data shown in the chart.
BANK OF ENGLAND
Inflation Report
August 2016
In order to maintain price stability, the Government has set the Bank’s Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) a target for the annual inflation rate of the Consumer Prices Index of 2%.
Subject to that, the MPC is also required to support the Government’s economic policy,
including its objectives for growth and employment.
The Inflation Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of
the Monetary Policy Committee. It serves two purposes. First, its preparation provides a
comprehensive and forward-looking framework for discussion among MPC members as an aid
to our decision-making. Second, its publication allows us to share our thinking and explain the
reasons for our decisions to those whom they affect.
Although not every member will agree with every assumption on which our projections are
based, the fan charts represent the MPC’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths
for inflation, output and unemployment, as well as the uncertainties surrounding those central
projections.
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998.
The Monetary Policy Committee:
Mark Carney, Governor
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy
Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability
Nemat Shafik, Deputy Governor responsible for markets and banking
Kristin Forbes
Andrew Haldane
Ian McCafferty
Gertjan Vlieghe
Martin Weale
The Inflation Report is available in PDF alongside PowerPoint‰ versions of the charts and
Excel spreadsheets of the data underlying most of them at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/2016/aug.aspx.

 Monetary Policy Summary i
Box A monetary policy package to support the UK economy iii
1 Financial markets and global economic developments 1
1.1 Developments in sterling asset markets 2
1.2 Developments in the euro area 5
1.3 Developments in the United States 6
1.4 Developments in emerging market economies 7
1.5 The near-term global outlook 8
Box Monetary policy since the May Report 3
Box The implications of falls in the yield curve for financial conditions and stability 9
2 Demand and output 13
2.1 Domestic demand 14
2.2 The current account and net trade 21
2.3 Near-term outlook for GDP 21
Box Agents’ survey on the impact on businesses of the vote to leave the European Union 15
Box Revisions to the National Accounts 20
3 Supply and the labour market 23
3.1 Labour demand 23
3.2 Slack in the economy 25
3.3 Labour supply 26
3.4 Productivity 27
Box Factors affecting the prospects for long-term supply following the EU referendum 29
4 Costs and prices 30
4.1 Consumer price developments and the near-term outlook 30
4.2 Imported cost pressures 31
4.3 Domestic cost pressures 33
5 Prospects for inflation 37
5.1 The MPC’s central projection, key judgements and risks 38
5.2 The projections for demand, unemployment and inflation 47
Box Other forecasters’ expectations 49
Index of charts and tables 50
Glossary and other information 52
Contents

 Monetary Policy Summary i
Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet the
2% inflation target, and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its
meeting ending 3 August 2016, the MPC voted for a package of measures designed to
provide additional support to growth and to achieve a sustainable return of inflation to the
target. This package comprises: a 25 basis point cut in Bank Rate to 0.25%; a new
Term Funding Scheme to reinforce the pass-through of the cut in Bank Rate; the purchase
of up to £10 billion of UK corporate bonds; and an expansion of the asset purchase scheme
for UK government bonds of £60 billion, taking the total stock of these asset purchases to
£435 billion. The last three elements will be financed by the issuance of central bank
reserves.
Following the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union, the exchange rate has fallen and the outlook for
growth in the short to medium term has weakened markedly. The fall in sterling is likely to push up on CPI inflation in
the near term, hastening its return to the 2% target and probably causing it to rise above the target in the latter part of
the MPC’s forecast period, before the exchange rate effect dissipates thereafter. In the real economy, although the
weaker medium-term outlook for activity largely reflects a downward revision to the economy’s supply capacity,
near-term weakness in demand is likely to open up a margin of spare capacity, including an eventual rise in
unemployment. Consistent with this, recent surveys of business activity, confidence and optimism suggest that the
United Kingdom is likely to see little growth in GDP in the second half of the year.
These developments present a trade-off for the MPC between delivering inflation at the target and stabilising activity
around potential. The MPC’s remit requires it to explain how it has balanced that trade-off. Given the extent of the
likely weakness in demand relative to supply, the MPC judges it appropriate to provide additional stimulus to the
economy, thereby reducing the amount of spare capacity at the cost of a temporary period of above-target inflation.
Not only will such action help to eliminate the degree of spare capacity over time, but because a persistent shortfall in
aggregate demand would pull down on inflation in the medium term, it should also ensure that inflation does not fall
back below the target beyond the forecast horizon. Thus, in tolerating a temporary period of above-target inflation, the
Committee expects the eventual return of inflation to the target to be more sustainable.
The MPC’s choice of instruments is based on a consideration of their likely impact on the real economy and inflation.
The MPC has examined closely the interaction between monetary policy and the financial sector, both with regard to
ensuring the effective transmission of monetary policy to households and businesses, and with consideration for the
financial stability consequences of its policy actions.
The cut in Bank Rate will lower borrowing costs for households and businesses. However, as interest rates are
close to zero it is likely to be difficult for some banks and building societies to reduce deposit rates much further,
which in turn might limit their ability to cut their lending rates. In order to mitigate this, the MPC is launching a
Term Funding Scheme (TFS) that will provide funding for banks at interest rates close to Bank Rate. This monetary
policy action should help reinforce the transmission of the reduction in Bank Rate to the real economy to ensure that
households and firms benefit from the MPC’s actions. In addition, the TFS provides participants with a cost effective
source of funding to support additional lending to the real economy, providing insurance against the risk that conditions
tighten in bank funding markets. 
ii Inflation Report August 2016
The expansion of the Bank of England’s asset purchase programme for UK government bonds will impart monetary
stimulus by lowering the yields on securities that are used to determine the cost of borrowing for households and
businesses. It is also likely to trigger portfolio rebalancing into riskier assets by current holders of government bonds,
further enhancing the supply of credit to the broader economy.
Purchases of corporate bonds could provide somewhat more stimulus than the same amount of gilt purchases. In
particular, given that corporate bonds are higher-yielding instruments than government bonds, investors selling
corporate debt to the Bank could be more likely to invest the money received in other corporate assets than those selling
gilts. In addition, by increasing demand in secondary markets, purchases by the Bank could reduce liquidity premia; and
such purchases could stimulate issuance in sterling corporate bond markets.
As set out in the August Inflation Report, conditional on this package of measures, the MPC expects that by the
three-year forecast horizon unemployment will have begun to fall back and that much of the economy’s spare capacity
will have been re-absorbed, while inflation will be a little above the 2% target. In those projections the cumulative
growth in output is still around 2½% less at the end of the forecast period than in the MPC’s May projections. Much of
this reflects a downward revision to potential supply that monetary policy cannot offset. However, monetary policy can
provide support as the economy adjusts. Had it not taken the action announced today, the MPC judges it likely that
output would be lower, unemployment higher and slack greater throughout the forecast period, jeopardising a
sustainable return of inflation to the target.
This package contains a number of mutually reinforcing elements, all of which have scope for further action. The MPC
can act further along each of the dimensions of the package by lowering Bank Rate, by expanding the TFS to reinforce
further the monetary transmission mechanism, and by expanding the scale or variety of asset purchases. If the incoming
data prove broadly consistent with the August Inflation Report forecast, a majority of members expect to support a
further cut in Bank Rate to its effective lower bound at one of the MPC’s forthcoming meetings during the course of the
year. The MPC currently judges this bound to be close to, but a little above, zero.
All members of the Committee agreed that policy stimulus was warranted at this time, and that Bank Rate should be
reduced to 0.25% and be supported by a TFS. Eight members supported the introduction of a corporate bond scheme,
and six members supported further purchases of UK government bonds.
These measures have been taken against a backdrop of other supportive actions taken by the Bank of England recently.
The Financial Policy Committee has reduced the countercyclical capital buffer to support the provision of credit and has
announced that it will exclude central bank reserves from the exposure measure in the current UK leverage ratio
framework. This latter measure will enhance the effectiveness of the TFS and asset purchases by minimising the
potential countervailing effects of regulatory requirements on monetary policy operations. The Bank has previously
announced that it will continue to offer indexed long-term repo operations on a weekly basis until the end of
September 2016 as a precautionary step to provide additional flexibility in the Bank’s provision of liquidity insurance.
The Prudential Regulation Authority will also smooth the transition to Solvency II for insurers. 
 A monetary policy package to support the UK economy iii
A monetary policy package to support the
UK economy
On 3 August, the MPC voted to introduce a package of
measures to support the economy. This box explains why it
took that action, how those measures will affect output and
inflation and sets out the details of each measure, alongside
other actions taken by the Bank.
Why is the MPC easing policy?
Following the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the
European Union, the exchange rate has fallen and the outlook
for growth in the short to medium term has weakened
markedly. The fall in sterling is likely to push up on CPI
inflation in the near term, hastening its return to the 2%
target and probably causing it to rise above the target in the
latter part of the MPC’s forecast period, before the exchange
rate effect dissipates thereafter. In the real economy,
although the weaker medium-term outlook for activity largely
reflects a downward revision to the economy’s supply
capacity, near-term weakness in demand is likely to open up a
margin of spare capacity, including an eventual rise in
unemployment. Consistent with this, recent surveys of
business activity, confidence and optimism suggest that the
United Kingdom is likely to see little growth in GDP in the
second half of the year.
These developments present a trade-off for the MPC between
delivering inflation at the target and stabilising activity around
potential. The MPC’s remit requires it to explain how it has
balanced that trade-off. Given the extent of the likely
weakness in demand relative to supply, the MPC judges it
appropriate to provide additional stimulus to the economy,
thereby reducing the amount of spare capacity at the cost of a
temporary period of above-target inflation. Not only will such
action help to eliminate the degree of spare capacity over
time, but because a persistent shortfall in aggregate demand
would pull down on inflation in the medium term, it should
also ensure that inflation does not fall back below the target
beyond the forecast horizon. Thus, in tolerating a temporary
period of above-target inflation, the Committee expects the
eventual return of inflation to the target to be more
sustainable.
The MPC’s August policy decision
The MPC discussed a range of monetary policy tools and the
support each would provide to the economy, and in particular
to UK households and businesses. In an environment of
heightened uncertainty and low interest rates, using a broad
range of tools should increase the effectiveness of the
monetary transmission mechanism, reducing any uncertainty
about the supply and price of credit as well as lowering its cost
and boosting its supply.
On 3 August, the MPC voted to introduce a package of
measures to support the economy:
• A 25 basis point cut in Bank Rate to 0.25%.
• A Term Funding Scheme to reinforce the pass-through of
the cut in Bank Rate, financed by the issuance of central
bank reserves.
• Purchases of a stock of sterling non-financial
investment-grade corporate bonds, issued by firms making
a material contribution to the UK economy, financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves, up to £10 billion.
• An increase in the stock of purchased UK government
bonds, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, by
£60 billion, to £435 billion.
The Term Funding Scheme (TFS) will operate as part of the
Asset Purchase Facility (APF). The value of lending in the TFS
will be determined by usage of the scheme, and could reach
around £100 billion. Coupled with the increase in asset
purchases of £70 billion, the total size of the APF could
increase by around £170 billion. The Government indemnifies
the Bank and the APF from any losses arising out of or in
connection with the Facility.
As set out in the August Inflation Report, conditional on this
package of measures, the MPC expects that by the three-year
forecast horizon unemployment will have begun to fall back
and that much of the economy’s spare capacity will have been
absorbed, while inflation will be a little above the 2% target.
In those projections the cumulative growth in output is still
around 2½% less at the end of the forecast period than in the
MPC’s May projections. Much of this reflects a downward
revision to potential supply that monetary policy cannot
offset. However, monetary policy can provide support as the
economy adjusts. Had it not taken the action announced
today, the MPC judges it likely that output would be lower,
unemployment higher and slack greater throughout the
forecast period, jeopardising a sustainable return of inflation
to the target.
This package contains a number of mutually reinforcing
elements, all of which have scope for further action. The MPC
can act further along each of the dimensions of the package by
lowering Bank Rate, by expanding the TFS to reinforce further
the monetary transmission mechanism, and by expanding the
scale or variety of asset purchases. If the incoming data prove
broadly consistent with the August Inflation Report forecast, a
majority of members expect to support a further cut in
Bank Rate to its effective lower bound at one of the MPC’s
forthcoming meetings during the course of this year. The MPC
currently judges this bound to be close to, but a little above,
zero.
iv Inflation Report August 2016
In forming its decision on monetary policy, the MPC has also
considered the interaction between monetary policy and the
financial sector. This included an evaluation of the costs to
banks, insurance companies and pension funds from falls in
yield curves in a joint meeting with the Financial Policy
Committee (FPC) on 6 July (see the box on pages 9–12).
How does the easing in monetary policy support
activity and inflation?
Monetary policymakers can stimulate the economy using a
variety of instruments. Typically central banks have used
short-term interest rates to influence demand and inflation.
But as rates have fallen close to zero, a greater variety of tools
have been used to influence financial conditions including
asset purchases. In addition to purchasing government debt,
some central banks have purchased corporate bonds and other
private sector assets. As well as providing money to the
economy and influencing activity through the same channels
as purchases of government debt, such purchases can also
influence companies’ borrowing costs more directly. Central
banks have also used other tools to support the economy and
address issues in particular markets. For example, the Bank
and the European Central Bank (ECB) have both used
programmes that provide finance to banks to support and
incentivise lending to the real economy.
The ultimate impact of these tools is broadly similar, with an
easing in policy — such as a reduction in Bank Rate or an
expansion in asset purchases — reducing interest rates for
households and companies and supporting asset prices and
confidence.
An easing in monetary policy in part acts through changing the
interest rates facing households and companies. By lowering
the cost of borrowing and the return on saving it encourages
people to bring forward spending — the real interest rate
channel. Lower rates also reduce the cost of debt servicing for
existing borrowers with floating-rate debt — the cash-flow
channel. Lower funding costs for banks also increase the
availability of credit — the credit channel. Monetary policy
also acts through financial markets more generally. Lower
rates and portfolio balance effects, for example as people who
sell assets to the Bank reinvest the money received in other
assets, support asset prices — the wealth channel. A monetary
policy expansion at home, relative to policy abroad, can also
lower the value of sterling, supporting net trade and raising
the cost of imports — the exchange rate channel. Finally,
monetary policy can directly influence people’s expectations
and behaviour. An easing in policy in the face of a prospective
reduction in demand can bolster sentiment and prevent a drift
down in inflation expectations — the confidence and
expectations channel.
What instruments are the MPC using?
The MPC has a number of instruments that it could use to
support the economy. In discussing which instruments to use
the MPC considered their likely impact on the economy,
including how directly they support UK households and
companies.
Bank Rate and its effective transmission
The MPC has announced a 25 basis point cut in Bank Rate
to 0.25%.
Purpose: to provide stimulus to the real economy and return
inflation sustainably to the 2% target.
Bank Rate is the rate of interest the Bank pays on the reserves
that commercial banks hold at the Bank of England. These
reserves, which can be converted into cash on demand,
represent the basic settlement asset within the banking
system. Bank Rate is therefore the benchmark around which
short-term interest rates in wholesale money markets are
determined. Wholesale interest rates in turn influence the
retail lending and deposit rates faced by UK households and
businesses. Banks and building societies make commercial
judgements that influence the degree of pass-through from
changes in Bank Rate into retail interest rates. As a result, the
degree to which a given decline in Bank Rate is matched by
equivalent changes in retail interest rates varies, in part
reflecting financial conditions at the time.
As set out in a box on pages 9–12, typically banks pay a lower
rate on deposits than they charge on loans they make to
businesses and households. This ‘net interest margin’
contributes to covering the cost of providing banking services
to their customers. When Bank Rate was far away from zero,
banks could move deposit and loan rates in tandem with
Bank Rate, preserving that margin. When Bank Rate is close to
zero, however, it may be harder for banks to lower deposit
rates and they may then face a choice between reducing
pass-through of lower official rates to those they charge on
loans — in particular rates on new loans — or a period of lower
profitability, which, were it to persist, could reduce the supply
of lending. In some countries where benchmark interest rates
have fallen to very low levels, such as Switzerland where rates
were cut below zero, net interest margins for many banks
appear to have been compressed. The interest rates on
deposits and lending have fallen little in response and some
rates have increased. In particular, interest rates on deposits
have tended to decline less when those rates were already at
low levels (Chart A).
Analysis by staff across the Bank suggests that cuts in
Bank Rate towards zero from 0.5% could, by themselves,
lower banks’ net interest margins a little, which could in turn
lead to upward pressure on margins on new lending. In such
 A monetary policy package to support the UK economy v
circumstances, the transmission of monetary policy would be
less effective than usual. To avoid the risk that reductions in
Bank Rate do not feed through fully to the rates faced by
households and businesses, the MPC is launching a Term
Funding Scheme (TFS), discussed further below. That will
provide funding for banks at interest rates close to Bank Rate
and has been calibrated so that any reduction in Bank Rate has
a broadly neutral impact on building societies’ and banks’
margins in aggregate. This monetary policy measure should
help reinforce the transmission of the reduction in Bank Rate
to the real economy so that households and firms benefit
from the MPC’s actions. This allows cuts in Bank Rate from
0.5% to have broadly the same impact as those made when
rates were further from zero. Its existence means that
Bank Rate can be lowered to its effective lower bound,
which the MPC judges currently to be close to, but a little
above, zero.
Transmission of lower rates to non-financial companies’
borrowing costs should be relatively rapid: those companies
had bank loans totalling £440 billion in June, with more than
four-fifths at floating rates. Transmission of lower Bank Rate
to rates faced by households tends to be slower. Only half of
mortgages by value are floating-rate contracts (Chart B). The
remainder are fixed-rate mortgages that will get refinanced
over time, such that most would see lower interest costs
within two years.
The Term Funding Scheme
The MPC has launched a Term Funding Scheme.
Purpose: to reinforce the transmission of Bank Rate cuts to those
interest rates actually faced by households and companies.
The primary objective of the TFS is to reinforce the
pass-through of cuts in Bank Rate to the interest rates faced
by households and companies. In order to achieve this, the
TFS will provide an initial allowance of funding to eligible
institutions (UK banks and building societies that are
participants in the Bank’s Sterling Monetary Framework and
signed up to the Discount Window Facility) that choose to
participate. These institutions will be able to borrow central
bank reserves at close to Bank Rate, for four years, with the
amount they can initially borrow equivalent to 5% of the
stock of their outstanding lending to UK businesses and
households. The lowest cost of funding — Bank Rate — will be
for banks that maintain or expand net lending to the real
economy. In addition to their initial allowance, banks will be
able to access another pound of funding for every pound their
net lending expands between end-June 2016 and
end-December 2017. If their lending shrinks, they will face a
higher fee and receive no additional allowance. For each 1%
that net lending by an institution falls, the cost of TFS funding
will rise by 5 basis points to a maximum of 25 basis points
over Bank Rate (Chart C). The cost of TFS funding is
substantially lower than banks’ current all-in funding costs in
wholesale markets or deposit rates, which average at least
100 basis points.
0
25
50
75
100
125
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Percentage pass-through since 2013 Q4
Level of deposit rates in 2013 Q4
Switzerland(e)
Denmark(c)(d)
Germany(b)
Sweden(b)
United Kingdom
 implied(c)(f)
Chart A Less pass-through of risk-free rates when
interest rates are lower
Level of retail deposit rates and pass-through of lower risk-free
rates(a)
(a) Effective household deposit rate on new business, unless otherwise stated, and change
between 2013 Q4 and the three months to May 2016 as a percentage of the change in the
corresponding maturity of swap rate.
(b) Includes interest rates for overnight deposits, and deposits with a maturity of less than one
year, between one and two years and greater than two years.
(c) Data are for the three months to June 2016.
(d) Outstanding interest rates for deposits with a maturity of less than three months, between
three months and one year, between one and two years and greater than two years.
(e) Published rates for new sight deposits, and on two and three-year cash bonds.
(f) Percentage of pass-through is that implied by bivariate regression on the data for other
European countries shown in this chart.
0
20
40
60
80
100
2004 06 08 10 12 14 16
Bank Rate tracker
Capped SVR(c)(d)
Uncapped SVR(c)(d)
Floating rate
SVR(c)
Other floating rate
Fixed rate
Share of value of outstanding mortgages (per cent)
Chart B Half of mortgages by value are floating-rate contracts
Distribution of mortgage lending(a)(b)
(a) Average daily balances on sterling household loans and deposits reported on Form ER
(effective rates). Data are non seasonally adjusted. Data from January 2016 are comprised
of individuals and individual trusts only. For more information, see the article
‘Developments in Effective Rates Statistics’ in the December 2015 edition of Bankstats.
(b) More granular breakdowns are included from the earliest point at which the data were
collected.
(c) Standard variable rate.
(d) The shares of capped and uncapped standard variable rates (SVRs) within total SVR are Bank
staff estimates over the period. The estimated data are not calculated monthly and have
been linearly interpolated to produce a monthly series.
vi Inflation Report August 2016
The TFS is a monetary policy instrument. It reinforces the
transmission of Bank Rate cuts and reduces the effective lower
bound toward zero, it charges a penalty rate if banks reduce
net lending, it covers all types of lending, and it is funded by
central bank reserves.
Absent the measures taken by the MPC, projections for
activity in the real economy, and particularly property
markets, would have been consistent with annual growth in
the stock of loans to households and companies of only
around 2% over the coming 18 months, although there is
substantial uncertainty about that projection. The MPC does
not expect the TFS to lead to significantly faster aggregate
loan growth. Rather it should be seen as a mechanism to
prevent any perverse effects on the supply of lending from the
cut in Bank Rate and help ensure that this cut is entirely
passed through to households and companies.
The TFS will have an initial drawdown period of 18 months.
The MPC will confirm by its August 2017 meeting whether the
drawdown period will close at end-February 2018 or be
extended. The MPC could adjust the terms (borrowing
allowance, pricing) and length of the Scheme should
macroeconomic conditions warrant it. However, the terms
and length of the Scheme would not be made less generous by
the MPC during the initial 18 month drawdown window. This
provides the certainty that participants need to form their
initial funding and lending plans. The TFS will operate as part
of the Asset Purchase Facility (APF). The value of lending in
the TFS will be determined by usage of the scheme, and could
reach around £100 billion. Institutions with outstanding
balances in the Bank’s Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) —
which are charged a fee of 25 basis points to borrow treasury
bills — can refinance those drawings in the TFS, up to their
allowance limit. More details of the scheme are available in a
market notice.(1)
Purchases of government bonds financed by central bank
reserves
The MPC has announced that it will increase the stock of
gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves by
£60 billion to £435 billion.
Purpose: to impart monetary stimulus by lowering the cost of
borrowing for households and companies; and by triggering
portfolio rebalancing into other assets by sellers of gilts.
The Bank launched its asset purchase programme in 2009,
purchasing £375 billion of gilts financed by the creation of
central bank reserves over the following three years. One way
that the asset purchase programme supports demand is
through portfolio rebalancing. Investors who sell gilts to the
Bank are unlikely to view the money received as a perfect
substitute for those gilts. In order for investors to be willing to
hold fewer gilts, their price must therefore rise. In addition,
rather than holding on to all of the money that they receive
from selling the assets, investors are likely to wish to use the
money to acquire closer substitutes for the assets sold to the
Bank, such as equities or corporate bonds. The increase in
demand for these assets should then push up their prices,
lowering their yields. And that demand should enable
companies to raise more or cheaper funds from capital
markets than they otherwise would, supporting their
productive activities, including hiring and investment.
Analysis of the impact of previous rounds of MPC and Federal
Open Market Committee purchases and the ECB’s more
recent quantitative easing programme suggests that they
lower yields on government debt and support activity and
inflation. In the United Kingdom, some of the fall in yields
seen recently may have reflected growing expectations of an
expansion in the asset purchase programme. That reduces the
benchmark rates used to determine borrowing costs for
households and companies. Evidence from earlier rounds of
gilt purchases in the United Kingdom suggests that the initial
purchase announcement appears to have had a particularly
pronounced impact on gilt yields relative to later ones,
possibly reflecting the associated signal of the MPC’s
commitment to supporting the economy and therefore the
outlook for interest rates.
The MPC is mindful of the fact that its asset purchase
programme will be expanded within the context of an already
low interest rate environment (Chart D). As set out in a box
on pages 9–12, long-term interest rates have fallen over recent
years, reflecting a range of factors including the outlook for
long-term supply and the balance between global saving and
planned global investment. Lower yields pose potential risks
(1) Further details of the extension of the APF are available at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/marketnotice160804apftfs.pdf.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
6 54321012345
Net lending over the reference period (per cent)
Fee on drawings (basis points)
+–
Chart C TFS fees rise as bank lending falls
TFS fee schedule
 A monetary policy package to support the UK economy vii
to some aspects of the functioning of the financial system,
for example by increasing the deficits of many pension funds
and through their effects on the business models of insurers.
At present, however, those effects appear to be relatively
limited. Many companies that see increased pension deficits
are able to extend the period over which they bring it back to
balance, maintaining the current level of contributions.
Indeed, the overall size of contributions to defined benefit
schemes has been broadly stable over the past decade, despite
fluctuations in the size of the deficit. Moreover, financial
stability will be supported by a number of regulatory actions
such as the Prudential Regulation Authority’s (PRA’s) decision
to smooth the transition to Solvency II for insurers (see
below).
As in previous rounds of purchases, the Bank will not purchase
bonds where it holds more than 70% of the ‘free float’, that is
the total amount in issue minus government holdings.(1)
Table 1 shows the available stock of gilts across different
maturities that would meet the Bank’s criteria.
Purchases of private sector debt financed by central bank
reserves
The MPC has announced a corporate bond purchase
programme of up to £10 billion, financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves.
Purpose: to impart monetary stimulus by lowering the yields on
corporate bonds, thereby reducing the cost of borrowing for
companies directly; by triggering portfolio rebalancing; and by
stimulating new issuance of corporate bonds.
The MPC judges that there are also merits to purchasing
private sector assets financed by the issuance of central bank
reserves. Given that corporate bonds are higher-yielding
instruments than government bonds, investors selling
corporate debt to the Bank could be more likely to want to
invest the money received in other corporate assets than
those selling gilts. In addition, by increasing demand in
secondary markets, purchases by the Bank could reduce
liquidity premia. The Asset Purchase Facility was used to ease
conditions in corporate debt markets during intense financial
market stress in 2009; only small quantities of private sector
assets were purchased but the Bank’s purchases played a role
in reducing liquidity premia from elevated levels (Chart E).
Moreover, such purchases could stimulate issuance in sterling
corporate bond markets. It is therefore likely that purchases
of corporate bonds would provide a greater boost to activity,
pound for pound, than purchases of government bonds. In
addition, such purchases could have fewer implications for the
financial system than additional gilt purchases.
Table 1 Stock of gilts available for purchase
Maturity Stock of outstanding gilts (£ billions)(a)
3–7 years 100.0
7–15 years 68.6
15+ years 221.7
(a) Measured in market value as at 27 July 2016. Stock of gilts available for purchase up to 70% of the
outstanding free float (amount in issue minus government holdings), excludes index-linked gilts.
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
5
Per cent
Years to maturity
United Kingdom
Japan
Germany
United States
+
–
0 10 15 20 25
Chart D Yield curves are low in many advanced
economies
Nominal yield curves derived from government bonds(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon spot rates derived from government bond prices. Averages for the fifteen
working days to 27 July.
(1) Available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/
marketnotice160804apfgilt.pdf.
0
150
300
450
600
750
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Basis points
Residual (including compensation for illiquidity)
Compensation for uncertainty about default losses
Compensation for expected default losses
Actual
Chart E Liquidity premia fell back in 2009
Decomposition of sterling investment-grade corporate bond
spreads(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Merrill Lynch, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) See Webber, L and Churm, R (2007), ‘Decomposing corporate bond spreads’, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 47, No. 4, pages 533–41; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb070403.pdf. Option-adjusted spreads over government
bond yields.
viii Inflation Report August 2016
The MPC will look to purchase, via the Corporate Bond
Purchase Scheme (CBPS), a portfolio of sterling investment
grade bonds representative of issuance by firms making a
material contribution to the UK economy, in order to impart
broad economic stimulus. Corporate bonds issued by banks,
building societies and insurance companies will not be eligible.
Bonds will also not be eligible if issued by leveraged
investment vehicles or from companies within groups that are
predominantly banks, building societies or insurance
companies.
The likely size of the market that would be eligible for the
CBPS is around £150 billion. The precise bonds that will be
eligible will be confirmed before purchases commence but as
an illustration of the nature of the market, Chart F shows the
sectoral breakdown of UK incorporated sterling
investment-grade corporate bonds. The purchases would
probably increase the prices and lower the rates on eligible
bonds and the programme could stimulate issuance of bonds
that would be eligible for the scheme. Portfolio balance
effects could also benefit all UK corporate bond issuers. The
market value of the outstanding stock of bonds issued by
UK private companies in all currencies (excluding banks and
insurers) is around £400 billion. Moreover, although
corporate bonds are typically issued by larger companies, any
shift towards debt issuance from bank lending by such
companies could increase the bank funding available to
smaller ones.
The CBPS is expected to commence in mid-September and
further details will be provided in a market notice ahead of its
launch. The CBPS will operate for an initial period of
18 months and is authorised by the MPC to make purchases
up to £10 billion over that period.(1)
What other actions is the Bank taking?
The actions taken by the MPC reinforce the support already
provided by the Bank. The Bank will continue to offer indexed
long-term repo operations on a weekly basis until
end-September 2016 as a precautionary step to provide
additional flexibility in the Bank’s provision of liquidity
insurance. This complements banks’ ability to draw on their
own liquidity buffers. The PRA will allow insurance companies
to use the flexibility in Solvency II regulations to reduce any
immediate pressure on them to sell other risky assets.
In July, the FPC reduced the countercyclical capital buffer rate
from 0.5% to 0%, which reduced regulatory capital buffers by
£5.7 billion, raising banks’ capacity for lending to
UK households and businesses by up to £150 billion.
On 4 August, the FPC announced that it had decided to
exclude central bank reserves from the exposure measure in
the current UK leverage ratio framework, with immediate
effect. In doing so, the FPC’s aim is to ensure that the leverage
ratio does not act as a barrier to the effective implementation
of policy measures that might lead to an increase in central
bank reserves. These measures include actions taken to
maintain monetary and financial stability since the
referendum on the United Kingdom’s membership of the
European Union: the package of actions being announced by
the Monetary Policy Committee; and the precautionary step
announced by the Bank on 30 June to provide additional
flexibility in the Bank’s provision of liquidity insurance by
continuing to offer indexed long-term repo operations on a
weekly basis until end-September 2016.(2) The PRA also made
a statement on how it is putting this change into effect.
Communications Utilities
Consumer
Diversified
Energy
Non-bank financial(c)
Industrial
9%
23%
3%
3%
14% 9%
38%
Chart F Corporate bonds are issued by companies
across a range of sectors
Distribution of sterling-denominated investment-grade corporate
bonds(a)(b)
Sources: Bloomberg, Dealogic and Bank calculations.
(a) May not sum to 100% due to rounding.
(b) The stock of UK-incorporated sterling investment-grade bonds, excluding those issued by
banks and insurers. Market value as at 2 August 2016. Stock based on Dealogic data.
Market values and sector classifications based on Bloomberg and Bank staff calculations.
(c) Includes issuers in the property and real estate sectors and excludes insurers.
(1) More information on the CBPS is available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/
markets/Documents/marketnotice160804apfcbps.pdf.
(2) As set out in the Statement from the FPC’s 25 July meeting, the FPC is making this
improvement to the design of the leverage ratio in the United Kingdom now, given
the policy measures being put in place. It recognises that, absent offsetting the
impact of this change, excluding current central bank reserves from the exposure
measure — the denominator of the leverage ratio — mechanically reduces the
nominal amount of capital required to meet the leverage ratio standard, other things
equal. This is not the FPC’s intention. It therefore intends to recalibrate the
UK leverage ratio standard to offset this impact. It will consult and decide on the
appropriate form of this recalibration as part of its planned review of the leverage
ratio framework in 2017, in the light of the finalised international standard. In the
intervening period, the PRA will monitor firms’ behaviour.
Following the referendum on UK membership of the European Union, sterling depreciated sharply
and the prices of domestically focused risky assets have fallen. The referendum also appears to
have contributed to falls in the prices of risky assets in some other economies, particularly the
euro area. Elevated uncertainty and a weaker growth outlook in the United Kingdom are projected
to weigh a little on the outlook for global growth in the near term.
1 Financial markets and global
economic developments
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 1
Following the UK referendum on European Union (EU)
membership on 23 June, sterling depreciated significantly
(Chart 1.1). The prices of sterling-denominated risky assets
that are most exposed to the UK economy have also fallen
(Section 1.1). This may reflect an increase in uncertainty
about the implications of the referendum and a deterioration
in UK near-term growth prospects (Section 2). The UK yield
curve has fallen markedly (Chart 1.2).
Following the referendum, there were material falls in the
prices of some euro-area risky assets (Section 1.2), most
notably bank equities where price falls were exacerbated by
concerns about the profitability of some euro-area banks.
Slower growth in the United Kingdom may also weigh on
euro-area export growth to some extent. Market participants’
expectations of further monetary policy stimulus by the
European Central Bank (ECB) appear to have grown.
In contrast, asset prices in the United States (Section 1.3)
and emerging market economies (Section 1.4) have been
broadly stable, notwithstanding some volatility around the
referendum. Trade links between the United Kingdom
and the United States are more limited than those with the
euro area, reducing the extent of any spillovers from a weaker
UK outlook. US market interest rates are also materially lower
than three months ago (Chart 1.2).
In the near term, global growth is expected to be broadly
stable and inflation is projected to rise gradually, although
the projection for growth is slightly lower than in May
(Section 1.5). Global economic developments beyond the
United Kingdom have been broadly as expected over the
past three months. An increase in uncertainty in the
United Kingdom is, however, expected to weigh on
UK domestic demand growth. In turn, through trade links,
this may reduce activity growth elsewhere. These
developments are likely to be only partially offset by the
support to spending growth from falls in UK, US and
euro-area yield curves (Chart 1.2).
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
Sterling ERI
€/£
$/£
May Report
Chart 1.1 Sterling fell sharply after the referendum
Sterling exchange rates
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2013 14 15 16 17 18 19
Per cent
United Kingdom
Euro area
Dashed lines: May Report
ECB deposit rate
ECB main
 refinancing rate
Federal funds rate(b)
Bank Rate
United States
Solid lines: August Report
+
–
Chart 1.2 Market-implied paths for US, UK and
euro-area policy rates have flattened
International forward interest rates(a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, European Central Bank (ECB) and Federal Reserve.
(a) The August 2016 and May 2016 curves are estimated using instantaneous forward overnight
index swap rates in the fifteen working days to 27 July and 4 May respectively.
(b) Upper bound of the target range.
2 Inflation Report August 2016
1.1 Developments in sterling asset markets
Exchange rates
The sterling ERI has fallen by 9% since the referendum on
23 June and by 15% since its peak in November 2015, having
weakened against both the euro and the US dollar (Chart 1.1).
In part, this may reflect concerns that, subject to the outcome
of any future negotiations, leaving the European Union is likely
to reduce the United Kingdom’s competitiveness (Section 3).
There remains, however, substantial uncertainty about the
nature of the United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements
and the implications for competitiveness. This may have
increased the risk premium required by investors to hold
sterling-denominated assets. Consistent with this, uncertainty
around the outlook for sterling, as measured by implied
volatility, remains elevated (Chart 1.3). The lower level of
sterling may also reflect the weaker outlook for UK demand
growth in the near term (Section 2), together with lower
relative interest rates; short-term interest rates have fallen by
more in the United Kingdom than in the United States and the
euro area (Chart 1.2).
Interest rates
Benchmark interest rates have fallen markedly in the
United Kingdom, with much of that decline occurring after
the referendum. In the run-up to the August Report, the
market-implied path of Bank Rate over the next three years
was around 40 basis points lower on average than in May, and
suggested expectations of a cut of around 25 basis points at
the MPC’s August meeting (Chart 1.2). As set out in the box
on page 3, the MPC voted to keep Bank Rate and the stock of
asset purchases unchanged at its meetings in June and July.
The details of the decision at its August meeting are set out in
the Monetary Policy Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and
in more detail in the Minutes of the meeting.
Yields on longer-term government bonds have also fallen: the
ten-year UK nominal yield reached 0.9% in July. While these
lower longer-term rates, in part, reflect the falls in short-term
interest rates, longer-term forward rates have also fallen
(Chart 1.4). Market contacts suggest that these falls in
forward rates are likely to reflect a combination of investors
seeking assets perceived as relatively safe, given heightened
uncertainty, and increased perceptions of downside risks to
the longer-term growth outlook. Market intelligence suggests
that it also reflects expectations that the MPC would increase
the stock of purchased assets. Consistent with this, the Bank’s
survey of external forecasters, discussed in the box on
page 49, suggests that around £70 billion of additional
purchases were expected.
Corporate capital markets
Interest rates on sterling-denominated investment-grade
corporate bonds have fallen since the May Report, reflecting
both the falls in benchmark interest rates and a slight
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
May Report
Differences from averages since 2002
(number of standard deviations)
Sterling(a)
Equities(b)
+
–
Chart 1.3 Uncertainty around the future value of
sterling remains elevated
Option-implied volatility
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Unweighted average of three-month sterling-US dollar and sterling-euro exchange rate
implied volatility.
(b) VIX measure of 30-day implied volatility of the S&P 500 equity index.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16
Per cent
United States
United Kingdom
May Report
Euro area(b)
Chart 1.4 Longer-term interest rates have fallen further
Ten-year forward nominal interest rates(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon instantaneous forward rates derived from government bond prices.
(b) An estimate based on French and German government bond prices.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 3
Monetary policy since the May Report
The MPC’s central projection in the May Report, under the
assumptions that Bank Rate followed a path implied by
market interest rates, that the stock of purchased assets
remained at £375 billion and of continued UK membership of
the European Union (EU), was that GDP growth was likely to
dip further in the near term, reflecting a period of uncertainty
around the referendum, before picking up to 2¼% as that
drag waned. CPI inflation was projected to pick up over the
next year or so, returning to the 2% target by mid-2018 and
rising slightly above it thereafter.
At its meeting ending on 15 June, the MPC noted that an
increasing range of financial asset prices had become more
sensitive to market perceptions of the likely outcome of the
EU referendum. There was also growing evidence that
uncertainty about the referendum was leading to delays to
major economic decisions that were costly to reverse,
including commercial and residential real estate transactions
and business investment.
Twelve-month CPI inflation was 0.3% in May, well below the
2% inflation target. This shortfall was due mainly to unusually
large drags from energy and food prices, which were expected
to attenuate over the next year. Core inflation also remained
subdued as a consequence of weak global price pressures, past
movements in sterling and restrained domestic cost growth.
Looking ahead, the anticipated pickup in inflation depended on
both a lessening drag from external factors and an increase in
domestic cost growth.
All Committee members considered the current stance of
monetary policy to be appropriate. The MPC noted, however,
that a vote to leave the EU could materially alter the outlook
for output and inflation, and therefore the appropriate setting
of monetary policy.
At its meeting ending on 14 July, the MPC considered the
early evidence on the impact of the vote to leave the EU and
the implications this had for monetary policy, in light of the
actions already taken by the Financial Policy Committee, the
Prudential Regulation Authority and the Bank. There had been
a sharp reaction in financial markets. Sterling had fallen
markedly against the dollar and, although the FTSE All-Share
index had risen over the same period, the equity prices of
UK-focused banks and other companies exposed to the
domestic property sector had fallen. Short-term and
longer-term interest rates had declined internationally and
there had been falls in the prices of euro-area risky assets.
Official data on economic activity covering the period since
the referendum were not yet available. Indicators of
uncertainty among households and companies had risen
further and early indications from surveys suggested that
some businesses were beginning to delay investment projects
and postpone recruitment. Regarding the housing market, the
latest RICS survey had pointed to a significant weakening in
expected activity. This evidence suggested the uncertainty
stemming from the referendum result was likely to depress
economic activity in the near term.
The sharp fall in the exchange rate would, in the short run, put
upward pressure on inflation. In the longer run, the path for
inflation would also depend crucially on how inflation
expectations responded. Financial market measures of
near-term inflation expectations had risen moderately
following the referendum, although only to around historical
averages and longer-term inflation expectations had fallen.
To that end, most members of the Committee expected
monetary policy to be loosened in August. The Committee
discussed various easing options and combinations thereof.
The exact extent of any additional stimulus measures would
be based on the Committee’s updated forecast, and their
composition would take account of any interactions with the
financial system and their effectiveness in supporting the
UK economy. Eight members judged it appropriate to leave
the stance of monetary policy unchanged at the July meeting.
For one member, the subdued economic outlook before the
referendum had already come close to warranting further
stimulus and the early evidence supported the view that
demand was likely to weaken further. The resulting outlook
for medium-term inflation therefore justified an immediate
loosening of monetary policy, to be supplemented by a
package of additional measures in August. 
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July
Indices: 23 June 2016 = 100
2016
FTSE All-Share
UK domestically
 focused companies
May Report 23 June
Chart 1.7 Equity prices of UK-focused companies have
fallen significantly
FTSE All-Share and UK domestically focused companies’ equity
prices(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Companies are categorised using annual financial accounts data on their geographic revenue
breakdown. UK domestically focused companies are defined as those generating at least
70% of their revenues in the United Kingdom.
4 Inflation Report August 2016
narrowing in the spreads on these bonds (Chart 1.5). In
contrast, spreads on high-yield bonds widened significantly
following the referendum, and by more than those on
US dollar and euro-denominated bonds. This may, in part,
reflect investors’ perceptions that the referendum had
increased UK corporate credit risk, particularly for riskier and
more domestically focused companies. As that widening in
spreads was broadly offset by the falls in benchmark rates,
the overall cost of debt for these high-yield companies was,
however, little changed.
Although the cost of debt finance has not increased
significantly, the cost of issuing new equity for
UK domestically focused companies has probably increased.
In the run-up to the August Report, the FTSE All-Share index
was 4% above its pre-referendum level, having recovered from
a fall of 7% in the two trading days following the referendum
(Chart 1.6). The equity prices of UK domestically focused
companies — those for which at least 70% of revenue is
earned in the United Kingdom — were, however, 9% below
their pre-referendum level (Chart 1.7). This is likely to reflect
the effect of weaker prospects for domestic demand growth
on their expected future profitability. Consistent with this,
two sectors that have seen large falls in equity prices were
the construction and consumer services sectors (Chart 1.8),
which derive a significant proportion of their revenue from
UK activity. In contrast, the sterling value of foreign profits
earned by internationally focused companies will have been
boosted by the depreciation.
Bank funding costs
Along with the construction and consumer services sectors,
the UK financial sector has seen some of the largest falls in
equity prices (Chart 1.8), concentrated in domestically
focused UK banks for which prices were 24% lower. In part
this is likely to reflect reduced expectations for bank
profitability in response to the weaker outlook for UK growth
(Section 2), and for property markets in particular as a
significant proportion of banks’ UK assets are loans linked to
property. And it may, in part, reflect greater uncertainty about
UK banks’ future access to markets in the European Union.
One other factor that could also affect bank profitability is
the path for market interest rates. As discussed in the box on
pages 9–12, the fall in international interest rates and the
flattening in the term structure of those rates in recent years
— which have continued since the May Report — may weigh
on banks’ net interest income.
In contrast to equity finance, the cost of debt funding for
banks has been broadly unchanged since May. While funding
spreads for UK banks widened somewhat around the turn of
the year, most have not widened much further following the
referendum (Chart 1.9). The impact of that on the overall
cost of debt funding since the turn of the year has been more
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
Percentage points
2015 16
23 June
Investment-grade (€)
Investment-grade (£)
High-yield (£)
High-yield (US$)
May Report
Investment-grade (US$)
High-yield (€)
Chart 1.5 Sterling high-yield corporate bond spreads
have widened
International non-financial corporate bond spreads(a)
Source: Bank of America Merrill Lynch Global Research.
(a) Spreads on government bond yields. Investment-grade bond yields are calculated using an
index of bonds with a rating of BBB3 or above. High-yield corporate bond yields are
calculated using aggregate indices of bonds rated lower than BBB3. Due to monthly index
rebalancing, movements in yields at the end of each month might reflect changes in the
population of securities within the indices.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Jan. July Jan. July
Indices: 2 January 2015 = 100
S&P 500
 (right-hand scale)
FTSE All-Share
 (right-hand scale)
Euro Stoxx
 (right-hand scale)
MSCI Emerging Markets
 (right-hand scale)
Shanghai Composite
 (left-hand scale)
2015
Index: 2 January 2015 = 100
May Report
16
23 June
Chart 1.6 International equity prices are broadly
unchanged, despite volatility around the referendum
International equity prices(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) In local currency terms, except for MSCI Emerging Markets, which is in US dollar terms.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 5
than offset by lower benchmark interest rates. As discussed in
the July 2016 Financial Stability Report, the UK financial system
is substantially more resilient than prior to the crisis. This
could explain why funding spreads have been broadly stable
despite the weaker outlook for profitability. Since the crisis,
UK banks have significantly reduced their reliance on
short-term wholesale funding. The capital requirements of
the largest UK banks are now ten times higher than before
the crisis. The results of the European Banking Authority
stress test, released on 29 July, also provided evidence that the
major UK banks have the resilience necessary to maintain
lending to the real economy in a macroeconomic stress
scenario.
Further, the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) decision in July
to lower the countercyclical capital buffer rate from 0.5% to
0% of banks’ UK exposures will enable banks to finance more
of any increase in lending using cheaper debt financing.(1) All
else equal, this should lower banks’ overall cost of funds and
support lending to households and companies (Section 2).(2)
1.2 Developments in the euro area
European markets for risky assets also appear to have been
affected by the UK referendum result, although other factors
are likely to have exacerbated the impact. Corporate bond
spreads widened slightly (Chart 1.5) and equity prices fell
sharply following the referendum (Chart 1.6), although
subsequently unwound. These movements in asset prices
may, in part, have reflected investors’ reassessment of
euro-area growth prospects in light of the potential spillovers
from the UK referendum. The projected near-term slowing in
UK growth (Section 2) and the depreciation in sterling will
reduce demand for euro-area exports, 14% of which are to the
United Kingdom.
Pre-existing concerns about banks in some euro-area
countries, in part relating to elevated levels of non-performing
loans on their balance sheets, may have exacerbated the
falls in euro-area financial sector equity prices since the
UK referendum (Chart 1.8).(3) Euro-area bank funding spreads
have also widened slightly since May.
Euro-area short-term (Chart 1.2) and longer-term (Chart 1.4)
interest rates have fallen since May, although the ECB left
policy unchanged in June and July. These lower interest rates
have been sufficient to offset the widening in bank funding
Per cent
Consumer
services
Manufacturing
Mining and
quarrying
Business
services
Construction
Financial
services
20 10 – + 0 10 20
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
Chart 1.8 UK equity prices have fallen since the
referendum in the construction, consumer services and
financial services sectors
Change in equity indices for selected sectors since 23 June(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Local currency terms. Change between 23 June and the average of the fifteen working days
to 27 July. Sectoral indices are calculated as an average of sub-indices of the Datastream
total market indices for the United Kingdom, United States and euro area, weighted by daily
shares in market capitalisation. Sectors capture around 96% of the FTSE All-Share.
(1) For more detail on the FPC’s decision, see the July 2016 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2016/fsrjul16.pdf.
(2) For more detail on the link between macroprudential capital policy and UK credit
conditions, see Harimohan, R and Nelson, B (2014), ‘How might macroprudential
capital policy affect credit conditions?’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 54,
No. 3, pages 287–303; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
quarterlybulletin/2014/qb14q303.pdf.
(3) For more detail on the risks relating to euro-area banks, see page 15 of the July 2016
Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2016/fsrjul16.pdf.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2011 12 13 14 15 16
Percentage points
Senior unsecured
 bond spread(a)
Spread on fixed-rate
 retail bonds(b)
Five-year CDS premia(c)
Covered bond
 spread(d)
May Report
+
–
Chart 1.9 Bank funding spreads have been broadly stable
UK banks’ indicative longer-term funding spreads
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Markit Group Limited and Bank calculations.
(a) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to mid-swaps for the
major UK lenders’ five-year euro-denominated senior unsecured bonds or a suitable proxy
when unavailable.
(b) Unweighted average of spreads for two-year and three-year sterling fixed-rate retail bonds
over equivalent-maturity swaps. Bond rates are end-month rates and swap rates are
monthly averages of daily rates. Bond rates for July are flash estimates.
(c) Unweighted average of five-year euro-denominated senior CDS premia for the major
UK lenders.
(d) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to swaps for the major
UK lenders’ five-year euro-denominated covered bonds or a suitable proxy when unavailable.
6 Inflation Report August 2016
Table 1.B Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in May Developments now anticipated
Advanced economies Growth revised down slightly
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average
a little below ½%. Inflation to remain
close to zero, before increasing gradually.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a
little above ½%. Annual PCE inflation
to fall slightly, before increasing to
around 1½%.
• Quarterly euro-area GDP growth to
average around ¼%. Annual inflation
to increase.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a
little above ½%. Annual PCE inflation
to pick up in coming months, averaging
a little below 1½%.
Rest of the world Broadly unchanged
• Average four-quarter PPP-weighted
EME growth of around 4%. Chinese
GDP growth to average around 6¾%.
• EME GDP growth of around 4¼%.
Chinese GDP growth to average
around 6½%.
The exchange rate Lower than expected
• Sterling ERI to evolve in line with the
conditioning assumptions.
• The sterling ERI depreciated by 7%.
spreads, such that euro-area credit conditions are expected to
be little changed. The falls in interest rates will reflect a range
of factors, perhaps including market participants’ expectations
of an extension of the ECB’s existing asset purchase schemes.
The corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP) and the
second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO II), both of which had been announced in March,
began in early June.
Average quarterly euro-area GDP growth remained robust
in H1 at 0.4%, although there was some volatility across Q1
and Q2 (Table 1.A). Domestic demand has been the driver of
recent activity growth, supported by ECB policy and a slightly
expansionary fiscal stance. Euro-area credit conditions have
improved significantly over the past few years, with the
interest rates faced by households and companies having
fallen in both core and periphery euro-area countries. The
Bank Lending Survey published by the ECB in July suggested
that the ECB’s TLTROs had enabled banks to ease terms and
conditions on lending, and euro-denominated corporate bond
spreads narrowed on the announcement of additional policy
measures by the ECB in March.
In the near term, growth is projected to remain subdued at
around 0.3% per quarter (Table 1.B), as weaker external
demand growth weighs on activity. This is slightly below the
projection three months ago. Headline inflation, which was
0.2% in July (Table 1.C), is expected to increase gradually, at a
similar pace to that projected three months ago.
1.3 Developments in the United States
US risky asset prices have been broadly stable since May. In
the run-up to the August Report, the level of the S&P 500 was
higher relative to three months ago — having recovered from
its falls immediately after the UK referendum (Chart 1.6) —
and the US dollar effective exchange rate was slightly higher.
Although there was a spike in implied volatility in US equity
markets in the immediate aftermath of the UK referendum,
this unwound quickly (Chart 1.3). US dollar-denominated
investment-grade corporate bond spreads were broadly
unchanged on the quarter and spreads on high-yield bonds
narrowed (Chart 1.5).
Financial asset prices may have, in part, been supported by
lower benchmark interest rates: the implied path for
US interest rates has flattened materially since the May Report
(Chart 1.2). In the run-up to the August Report, the
market-implied path for the federal funds rate reached 0.8%
in three years’ time, compared with 1.1% three months ago.
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) voted to keep
rates unchanged in June and July, and the median projections
of FOMC members for interest rates in 2017 and 2018 were
revised down. As noted in its July statement, indicators
pointed to some increase in labour utilisation, activity had
Table 1.A Global activity growth picked up around the turn of the
year
GDP in selected countries and regions(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier, annualised
 Averages 2016
 1998– 2012– 2014 2015 2015 Q1 Q2
 2007 13 H1 H2
United Kingdom 2.9 1.9 3.5 1.4 2.3 1.8 2.4
Euro area (39%) 2.3 -0.2 1.0 1.9 1.5 2.2 1.2
United States (16%) 3.0 1.9 2.5 2.3 1.4 0.8 1.2
China (4%)(b) 10.0 7.7 7.3 7.0 6.9 6.7 6.7
Japan (2%) 1.1 1.1 -0.8 1.8 0.0 1.9 n.a.
India (2%)(b) n.a. 6.2 7.0 7.1 7.4 7.9 n.a.
Russia (1%)(c) 7.8 1.6 -0.7 -4.9 -2.3 n.a. n.a.
Brazil (1%) 3.1 2.6 -0.6 -6.1 -5.7 -1.1 n.a.
UK-weighted world GDP(d) 3.0 1.5 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.3 n.a.
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), OECD, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) Real GDP measures. Figures in parentheses are shares in UK goods and services exports in 2014.
(b) Data are four-quarter growth. The earliest observation for India is 2012 Q2.
(c) The earliest observation for Russia is 2003 Q2. Figure for 2015 H2 is based on data to 2015 Q3. Official
seasonally adjusted GDP data beyond 2015 Q3 are not yet available.
(d) Constructed using data for real GDP growth rates for 180 countries weighted according to their shares in
UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the latest observation is 2016 Q1. For those countries where
data are not yet available, Bank staff projections are used.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 7
continued to expand at a more moderate pace and near-term
risks to the economic outlook had diminished. Long-term
forward interest rates have also fallen, in a similar fashion to
those in the United Kingdom and euro area (Chart 1.4).
Quarterly US GDP growth picked up slightly to 0.3% in Q2,
weaker than expected, having been just 0.2% in Q1. As a
result, growth in Q2 remained below its 2015 average
(Table 1.A), although consumption growth was strong.
GDP growth is expected to increase to around ½% per quarter
in the second half of the year (Table 1.B), supported in part by
a projected strengthening in real wage growth as the labour
market continues to normalise. Headline inflation is projected
to pick up gradually, supported by the waning effect of past
commodity price falls and robust labour cost growth.
1.4 Developments in emerging market
economies
As in the United States, financial markets in emerging
market economies (EMEs) have been relatively stable,
notwithstanding some volatility in the immediate aftermath
of the UK referendum, and are likely to have been supported
to some degree by the flattening in the US yield curve.
EME growth was slightly stronger than expected in H1:
activity in Brazil, for example, contracted less rapidly than
expected in Q1, while growth in India picked up to nearly 8%
(Table 1.A). This unexpected strength is judged, however,
largely to reflect temporary factors and measurement issues
rather than a fundamental improvement in near-term
prospects. In China, policy stimulus measures are likely to
have supported the pace of GDP growth, which was 6.7% in
Q2, broadly as expected. In the near term, the central
projection is for a gradual recovery in aggregate EME growth,
albeit to a rate below past averages (Table 1.B), reflecting
long-term demographic and structural factors, although the
balance of risks around the outlook remains to the downside.
There is a risk that the recovery in growth in many EMEs could
be impeded by their exposure to a reversal in international
capital inflows. Estimates from the Institute of International
Finance suggest that portfolio flows into EMEs excluding China
recovered in June and July, having dipped in May. Data on
China’s foreign exchange reserves also suggest that outflows
from China have stabilised. An adverse change in market
sentiment towards EMEs or an unexpected tightening in
US monetary policy, however, could trigger renewed capital
outflows from emerging markets and a tightening in credit
conditions in those economies.
The effects on EME growth of any reversal in capital flows
and associated tightening in credit conditions would be
exacerbated by high levels of outstanding debt. Over the
past year, debt to GDP ratios have continued to increase
Table 1.C Inflation remains weak across countries
Inflation in selected countries and regions
Per cent
 Monthly averages 2016
 1998– 2014 2015 2015 2016 Apr. May June July
 2007 H1 H2 Q1
Annual headline consumer price inflation
United Kingdom 1.6 1.5 0.1 0.0 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.5 n.a.
Euro area(a) 2.0 0.4 -0.1 0.1 0.0 -0.2 -0.1 0.1 0.2
United States(b) 2.0 1.4 0.2 0.4 1.0 1.1 0.9 n.a. n.a.
UK-weighted
world inflation(c) 2.0 1.0 0.4 0.6 0.7 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Annual consumer price inflation excluding food and energy(d)
United Kingdom 1.2 1.6 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.4 n.a.
Euro area(a) 1.6 0.8 0.7 0.9 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.9
United States(b) 1.8 1.5 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.6 1.6 n.a. n.a.
Sources: Eurostat, IMF WEO, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and
Bank calculations.
(a) Data point for July 2016 is a flash estimate.
(b) Personal consumption expenditure price index inflation. Data for June were released after the preparation
of this Report.
(c) Constructed using data for consumption deflators for 51 countries weighted according to their shares in
UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the last observation is 2016 Q1. For those countries where
data are not yet available, Bank staff projections are used.
(d) For the euro area and the United Kingdom, excludes energy, food, alcoholic beverages and tobacco. For the
United States, excludes food and energy.
8 Inflation Report August 2016
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Index
Chart 1.11 Survey indicators of global growth have
softened over recent quarters
Global composite PMI(a)
Sources: JPMorgan and Markit Economics.
(a) Composite (manufacturing and services) purchasing managers’ index (PMI). Based on the
results of surveys in over 30 countries. Together these countries account for an estimated
87% of global GDP. A figure over 50 indicates rising output compared with the previous
month, and a figure below 50 indicates falling output. Last data point is June 2016.
significantly in a number of EMEs. For example, in China,
four-quarter growth in total social financing was 13% in
2016 Q2, and the amount outstanding is now a little over
200% of annual GDP. Overall, non-financial sector
indebtedness in EMEs was around 180% of GDP in 2015 Q4
(Chart 1.10). Further, while the overall proportion of
EME debt denominated in local currency has been rising, a
significant proportion is still denominated in foreign currency,
particularly US dollars. Capital outflows would tend to be
associated with falls in the value of local currencies relative
to the US dollar, and therefore could increase the value of
dollar-denominated debt in local currency terms.(1)
1.5 The near-term global outlook
Overall, average quarterly growth in UK-weighted global
activity was relatively stable at around ½% in 2015 — and
picked up a little in 2016 Q1 — although it remained subdued
relative to its pre-crisis average of ¾%. In the near term,
growth is projected to remain stable at around its current rate,
a little weaker than projected three months ago (Table 1.B),
largely reflecting the spillovers from the UK referendum to the
euro area (Section 1.2). As in recent Reports, the risks around
this projection are judged to lie to the downside. Some
indicators of global activity point to a more material slowing
in growth in H2; for example, the global composite PMI is
around its lowest level for four years (Chart 1.11). Further,
existing vulnerabilities in EMEs could be exacerbated by a
deterioration in market sentiment or US monetary policy
tightening faster than expected.
The near-term projection for global inflation is for it to
increase gradually, broadly similar to the May projection. Core
inflation — which excludes food and energy prices — remains
below average in many economies (Table 1.C). Those
below-average rates reflect, in part, the effects of past
commodity price falls continuing to feed through the supply
chain. They are also likely to reflect a degree of spare capacity
remaining. Accordingly, four-quarter UK import-weighted
world export price inflation, excluding energy, remained
subdued at around -2½% in 2016 Q1, compared with its past
average rate of around 1%. The significant depreciation of the
sterling exchange rate (Section 1.1), however, means that
annual sterling UK import price inflation is projected to reach
around 6% in 2017 Q1 (Section 4).
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2003 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Per cent
Emerging economies
Advanced economies
All reporting countries
Chart 1.10 Debt to GDP in emerging markets has
continued to increase
Non-financial sector debt to nominal GDP ratios
Source: Bank for International Settlements total credit statistics.
(1) For more detail on the financial risks faced by EMEs, see pages 15–16 of the July 2016
Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2016/fsrjul16.pdf.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 9
The implications of falls in the yield curve for
financial conditions and stability
Since the May Report, benchmark interest rates — such as
government bond yields — have fallen in many advanced
economies (Chart A), extending their falls in recent years
(Section 1). Indeed, many rates are at their lowest ever
levels.(1) While some of those falls may reflect expectations of
monetary policy stimulus (Section 1), much is likely to reflect
factors such as the outlook for long-term supply in the
economy and the balance between global saving and planned
global investment.(2) For example, increased private sector
precautionary saving in response to heightened global
uncertainty, and increased public sector saving through
reserves accumulation in some countries, are likely to have
been responsible for a large part of the decline in interest rates
in recent years.
Although falls in the yield curve may be driven by a
deterioration in growth prospects, these falls may themselves
help to support spending and the economic outlook by
reducing borrowing costs and boosting asset prices. Due to
the nature of their businesses, however, such falls can have
adverse implications for the profitability and functioning of
financial intermediaries. Indeed, some of the recent falls in
banks’ and insurers’ equity prices (Section 1) may have
reflected expectations that the shift down in yield curves
could reduce future profitability. That may have
consequences for financial stability and, to the extent it
affects the price and availability of financial services, the
economic outlook. On 6 July, the Financial Policy Committee
(FPC) and the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) met to
discuss, and were presented with analysis on, the sensitivity of
banks, insurers and pension providers to falls in the yield curve
and the implications for their ability to provide financial
services. This box provides a summary of that material.
Banks
One of the main ways a fall in the yield curve can affect banks
is through the so-called ‘net interest margin’ that they earn. A
core part of the business model of many banks is receiving
interest payments on their assets, such as longer-term loans
to businesses to finance investment, and paying interest on
their liabilities, such as shorter-term retail deposits from
households. The profitability of this model and the ability of
banks to cover the costs of providing those services depends
on the difference between the interest rates at which banks
borrow and the interest rates at which they lend, known as the
net interest margin. Bank retail deposits tend to attract
interest rates below benchmark interest rates reflecting the
cost of transaction services provided to depositors.(3) To cover
the risk of losses associated with loans and other costs of
providing and servicing the loans, banks tend to charge
borrowers interest rates above benchmark rates.
The level and slope of benchmark interest rates can, therefore,
have implications for the net interest margin that banks
earn.(4) The ability of banks to lower retail deposit rates below
0% is restricted by the ability of customers to withdraw their
deposits as cash, which can be held without incurring interest
charges. As benchmark rates get closer to 0%, this reduces
the spread that banks are able to earn between deposit and
benchmark rates. Indeed, following the falls in Bank Rate
during the crisis, the spread to deposit interest rates narrowed
significantly (Chart B).
Some of the fall in deposit spreads, and the reduction in
profits banks earn, may be offset by increased spreads on their
existing stock of lending. To the extent that this lending is at
longer-term fixed interest rates, then falls in wholesale
interest rates will, for a time, increase the spreads banks earn
on this lending. Many banks, however, use so-called ‘interest
rate swaps’ to exchange the fixed-rate interest they receive on
lending for floating-rate payments that are more closely linked
to their funding costs. Moreover, the interest rates on many
loans are floating rate; some, such as ‘tracker’ mortgages, are
explicitly linked to Bank Rate or other market interest rates.
Per cent
0 5 10 15 20 25
Years to maturity
Solid lines: August Report
Dashed lines: May Report
United States
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
+
–
United Kingdom
Euro area(b)
Chart A Yield curves are lower than in May
Nominal government bond yields(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon spot rates derived from government bond prices.
(b) Based on French and German government bond prices.
(1) For more on long-run time series of interest rates, see Haldane, A (2015), ‘Stuck’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech828.pdf.
(2) For more on the longer-term influences on interest rates see the box on pages 42–43
of the August 2014 Report, www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
inflationreport/2014/ir14aug.pdf; and Rachel, L and Smith, T D (2015), ‘Secular
drivers of the global real interest rate’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 571,
www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2015/swp571.pdf.
(3) For more detail on how this works in practice, see the box on pages 174–75 of
Button, R, Pezzini, S and Rossiter, N (2010), ‘Understanding the price of new lending
to households’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 50, No. 3, pages 172–82;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb100301.pdf.
(4) For more detail on the link between net interest margins and the yield curve, see
Alessandri, P and Nelson, B (2015), ‘Simple banking: profitability and the yield curve’,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 47, No. 1, pages 143–75.
10 Inflation Report August 2016
Indeed, around half of the stock of UK mortgages and more
than four fifths of UK corporate loans are floating rate
(Table 1). So banks will be less able to increase spreads on
that lending in response to falling benchmark rates,
compressing overall net interest margins.
On new lending, banks may choose to limit the extent to
which any fall in benchmark interest rates is passed through to
the interest rates they charge in order to maintain their net
interest margins. Moreover, if the effects described above
mean the net interest margin that banks earn on their existing
stock of lending is reduced, then they may even increase
interest rates on new lending to compensate, which would
tighten credit conditions.
There is some evidence of these effects following the falls in
UK benchmark interest rates during the financial crisis: the
spread between the rates charged by banks on new mortgage
lending and Bank Rate remains much wider than prior to
the crisis (Chart B). Overall, though, despite the falls in
benchmark rates, UK banks’ net interest margins have
remained broadly stable on average in recent years at
around 2¼% (Chart C), and are only slightly lower than
pre-crisis levels. However, in some countries where
benchmark interest rates have fallen to very low levels, such
as Switzerland where rates were cut below zero, net interest
margins for many banks appear to have been compressed. The
interest rates on deposits and lending have fallen little in
response and some rates have increased. In particular, interest
rates on deposits have tended to decline less when these rates
were already at low levels. As explained in the box on
pages iii–viii, the consideration of these effects underpinned
the design of the MPC’s Term Funding Scheme (TFS) to
reinforce the pass-through of cuts in Bank Rate.
The desire among banks to maintain profitability may limit the
extent to which the falls in the yield curve are passed on to
household and corporate interest rates. Banking sector
profitability has been weak in recent years due to factors such
as the cost of past misconduct and the changing nature of
investment banking.(1) Those factors have offset a relatively
healthy return on lending to the real economy. While the
recent further fall in the UK yield curve since May is likely to
have reduced banks’ net interest margins on their existing
UK lending somewhat, the underlying return that large
UK banks earned on UK retail and commercial lending in 2015
is estimated to be 15% of the equity held for that lending, on
average, compared to an overall return on equity of 3%.(2)
0
1
2
3
4
5
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Per cent
Range of net interest margins
Average
Chart C Banks’ net interest margins have been relatively
stable
Estimates of large UK banks’ net interest margins(a)
Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.
(a) Estimates derived from published accounts for the six largest UK banks: Barclays, HSBC,
Lloyds Banking Group, Nationwide, Royal Bank of Scotland and Santander UK. The definition
of net interest margin used differs by bank and over time, as the calculation is not prescribed
under International Financial Reporting Standards.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1999 2002 05 08 11 14
Per cent
Bank Rate(b)
Rate on stock of interest-bearing
 sight deposits(a)
Rate on new
 secured lending(a)
Rate on stock of
 secured lending(a)
Chart B As benchmark interest rates fell towards zero,
deposit spreads were compressed and mortgage spreads
widened
Bank Rate and selected household effective interest rates
(a) Effective rates on sterling household loans and deposits. The Bank’s effective rate series
are currently compiled using data from up to 19 UK monetary financial institutions (MFIs).
The effective rate is an average monthly rate. Non seasonally adjusted.
(b) End-month rate.
(1) For more details on the other factors affecting bank profitability, see pages 20–21 of
the July 2016 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2016/fsrjul16.pdf.
(2) Bank staff estimate for 2015 for the six largest UK banks, calculated using banks’
reported divisional accounts and with equity apportioned according to divisional
risk-weighted assets.
Table 1 Around half of all mortgages and four fifths of corporate
lending is floating rate
Proportion of the stock of UK-resident MFIs’ lending and deposits at fixed
and floating rate in 2016 Q1(a)
Per cent
 Floating rate Fixed rate
Secured lending to households 50 50
Unsecured lending to households 25 75
Lending to private non-financial corporations 82 18
Deposits from households(b)(c) 73 27
Deposits from private non-financial corporations(b)(c) 60 40
(a) Average daily balances on sterling household loans and deposits reported on form ER (effective rates), and
balance sheet data reported on forms BE and BT. Non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Floating rate includes sight deposits and redeemable-at-notice time deposits.
(c) Fixed rate includes non interest bearing deposits and fixed-maturity time deposits.
 Section 1 Financial markets and global economic developments 11
Those healthy returns, alongside recent regulatory changes
such as the reduction in the countercyclical capital buffer by
the FPC (Section 1), should help to support the supply of credit
to the real economy. Moreover, any falls in interest rates for
borrowers will reduce the extent to which they are likely to
default on their payments and so, in turn, reduce the potential
impairments and credit losses on lending banks face, further
supporting credit conditions.
Insurers
Falls in the yield curve can also affect insurers’ profitability,
particularly for life insurers. Insurers collect and invest upfront
payments for the potential provision of payouts in the future,
such as to limit the financial costs associated with risks to
physical property or in the occurrence of ill health or loss of
life. As a result, the solvency of insurers and their ability to
provide insurance services is sensitive to changes in the value
of their investments and expected payouts.(1)
Insurers are required to hold sufficient assets to cover their
expected payouts and those that may occur in stressed
conditions. Further, under Solvency II, the new regulatory
regime for insurers effective from the start of 2016, insurers
are also required to hold enough assets to cover the so-called
‘risk margin’ that represents the additional cost of capital
another insurer would incur were they required to take over
those liabilities.(2)
All of these elements are calculated by discounting future
payouts in line with the benchmark yield curve. As a result,
when the yield curve falls, the present value of future payouts
increases. This effect is most acute for life insurers whose
expected payouts tend to lie quite far into the future and,
hence, their present value is quite sensitive to the discount
rate used. The calculation of the risk margin is also
particularly sensitive to changes in interest rates. While a fall
in the yield curve will increase the value of some of the assets
insurers hold, such as bonds, for many life insurers that is
unlikely to offset all of the increase in obligations, including
the risk margin.
Falls in the yield curve could, therefore, lead to some insurers
increasing the cost of providing new insurance in order to
increase their asset holdings. At present, however, the impact
of the transition to Solvency II is being phased in over the next
16 years, which will dampen any immediate impact on
insurers’ balance sheets. Moreover, while the cost of
protection against insurers’ default increased slightly following
the recent falls in the yield curve, it remains relatively stable
reflecting the perceived resilience of the insurance sector
among market participants (Chart D). That resilience should
help to support the provision of insurance.(3)
Pension providers
A third group of financial services that can be affected by
shifts in the yield curve are pension providers. Pension
providers invest upfront contributions in a pension fund to
provide payouts and income to the beneficiaries on
retirement. For defined-benefit pensions, such as some of
those provided occupationally, the value of those future
obligations is largely specified in advance. As with insurers,
therefore, the present value of potential future payouts
increases when the yield curve falls. While a fall in the yield
curve will boost the value of pension funds’ bond holdings, for
many pension funds that will typically be more than matched
by the increase in the value of their liabilities. Falls in
benchmark yields, therefore, tend to be associated with
increases in the deficit that pension funds face.
One timely measure of the size of pension fund deficits is
provided by the Pension Protection Fund. On that measure,
UK defined-benefit pension funds had a deficit of 28% of their
liabilities in June (Chart E), close to the largest on record. The
size of pension fund deficits will be affected by changes in
asset prices, such as equity and property prices, but much of
the recent increase in the deficit is likely to have been due to
the fall in the yield curve.
(1) For more details on the interaction between insurers and financial stability see
French, A, Minot, D and Vital, M (2015), ‘Insurance and financial stability’,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 55, No. 3, pages 242–58;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2015/q303.pdf.
(2) For more details on Solvency II see Swain, R and Swallow, D (2015), ‘The prudential
regulation of insurers under Solvency II’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 55,
No. 2, pages 139–52; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
quarterlybulletin/2015/q203.pdf.
(3) For more details on the resilience of the insurance sector and the phasing in of
Solvency II see pages 24–25 of the July 2016 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2016/fsrjul16.pdf.
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Basis points
Chart D Market-based measures of insurers’ resilience
remain broadly stable
Average cost of default protection on selected UK insurers(a)
Sources: Markit CDS Pricing and Bank calculations.
(a) Average of five-year senior credit default swap premia of Aviva, Legal and General,
Prudential and Standard Life. Data for Standard Life start in October 2006; data for Aviva
start in June 2009.
12 Inflation Report August 2016
Companies are required by the Pensions Regulator to have
plans in place to eliminate any pension deficit. To meet the
cost of an increased deficit companies may reduce their
dividends or attempt to reduce other spending, which could
weigh on activity. For example, to the extent they are
constrained by available funds, companies may reduce
investment or they may try to reduce other labour costs such
as salaries or benefits for employees.
Companies are, however, only required to update their
pension deficit reduction plans every three years. Many
companies that see an increase in their deficit may also be
able to extend the period over which they bring it back to
balance, while maintaining the current level of contributions.
Indeed, the overall size of contributions to defined-benefit
schemes has been broadly stable over the past decade, despite
significant fluctuations in the size of deficits. The Bank’s
Agents currently report little evidence of companies having
adjusted their investment plans in response to their pension
deficits. Companies’ cash and financial positions have also
improved since the financial crisis and access to external
finance continues to be supportive of investment growth
(Section 2). And, to the extent a lower yield curve helps to
support consumer spending through lower borrowing rates
and higher asset prices, that will in turn support companies’
profitability.
Conclusion
The recent falls in international yield curves could pose risks to
the functioning of the financial system through their effects
on the business models of intermediaries such as banks,
insurers and pension funds. At present, however, those effects
appear to be relatively limited and overall financial conditions
will be supported by a number of regulatory actions, such as
the reduction in the countercyclical capital buffer for banks
and the smooth transition to Solvency II for insurers. To the
extent to which those falls reflect monetary policy stimulus,
that would support the economic environment, raising asset
prices and reducing losses, which should support the provision
of financial services. The need among banks to maintain
profitability in the face of falls in the yield curve would all else
equal, however, be likely to dampen the extent to which it is
passed through to lower interest rates for households and
companies. In light of this, and as explained in the box on
pages iii–viii, the MPC has taken action to reinforce the
pass-through of cuts in Bank Rate through the Term Funding
Scheme (TFS).
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
2007 09 11 13 15
Per cent Per cent
Fifteen-year yield(a)
 (left-hand scale)
Pension fund balance(b)
 (right-hand scale)
+
–
Chart E Defined-benefit pension fund deficits have
increased as long-term yields have fallen
Fifteen-year government bond yield and the balance on
UK defined-benefit pension funds as a proportion of total liabilities
Sources: Pension Protection Fund and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon spot rate derived from government bond prices.
(b) Calculated as the aggregate value of pension fund assets less the value of their liabilities,
divided by the total value of liabilities. Calculated on a S179 basis, which is the theoretical
cost that would have to be paid to a private insurance company to take on the level of
protection provided by the Pension Protection Fund. As the Fund does not provide
protection for the full liability, this number may be somewhat smaller than a similar measure
calculated based on companies’ financial statements.
2 Demand and output
 Section 2 Demand and output 13
The vote to leave the European Union is likely to affect
spending through a number of channels, including greater
uncertainty. There is, however, little information available yet
on the severity of these channels and how they may interact
with each other over the near term.
Measures of uncertainty had been rising ahead of the
referendum and have risen further since (Chart 2.1). That is
likely to reflect ambiguity about the nature of the
United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements with its
economic partners, and the implications of those
arrangements for economic activity and incomes. As
discussed in the box on pages 14–15 of the May Report,
heightened uncertainty tends to depress spending by firms
and households as they delay decisions and hold back on
major purchases.
There have also been significant moves in some financial asset
prices (Section 1). Most notably, sterling has depreciated by
9% since the referendum and is around 10% lower than the
conditioning path assumed in the May Report. That will weigh
on domestic spending by raising the cost of imported
investment and consumption goods and services. Though it
will tend to support net trade volumes.
In addition to these developments, households and companies
may be revising down expectations of future incomes.
A prospective change in the United Kingdom’s future trading
arrangements would probably be associated with some period
of adjustment as firms anticipate, and adapt to, that change.
Over that time, some resources are likely to be reallocated,
and output may be lower than it otherwise would have been.
The anticipation of lower income as a result of those effects
could reduce spending.
In contrast with the financial crisis, there have not been any
significant changes in the funding costs of banks (Section 1),
The vote to leave the European Union is likely to affect GDP growth through a number of channels,
but there are currently few post-referendum data available to assess the scale of those effects.
Growth was firmer than expected ahead of the referendum, but the available indicators suggest
that domestic demand growth is likely to slow over the near term as greater uncertainty and lower
confidence drag on activity. That is already apparent in the housing and commercial property
sectors, where indicators point to significant falls in activity. The large depreciation in sterling
should, however, support net trade in the near term.
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1991 95 99 2003 07 11 15
Differences from averages since 1991 (number of standard deviations)
Principal component(b)
Range of uncertainty
 indicators(a)
Chart 2.1 Uncertainty has continued to rise
Range of uncertainty measures
Sources: Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, Dow Jones Factiva, GfK (research on behalf of the
European Commission), Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Range includes: the average standard deviation of monthly Consensus Economics forecasts
for GDP growth in the current and next year ahead, seasonally adjusted by Bank staff; the
number of media reports citing uncertainty in four national broadsheet newspapers; survey
responses of households to questions relating to their personal financial situation and
unemployment expectations; and the three-month implied volatilities for the FTSE 100 and
sterling ERI — realised volatilities have been used prior to April 1992 and September 2001
respectively. Media and implied volatilities data for July are based on daily data up to
27 July. A higher number indicates greater uncertainty.
(b) The first principal component extracted from the set of indicators.
14 Inflation Report August 2016
nor signs of constraints on the supply of credit. As discussed
in the July 2016 Financial Stability Report, the resilience of the
UK banking system has improved markedly over recent years,
which should ensure that the availability of credit to
households and businesses does not tighten as it did in
2008–09. As discussed in the 2016 Q2 Credit Conditions
Review, the major UK lenders expect the availability of credit
to remain steady in the near term.
The developments following the referendum will take time to
be revealed in official data. GDP growth of 0.6% in 2016 Q2
was firmer than expected. Many indicators, however, point to
much weaker growth in July, with some pointing to a
contraction.
Domestic demand growth is, therefore, projected to slow
materially over the near term (Section 2.1), though there is
considerable uncertainty about the extent of that slowing.
The most pronounced signs of a slowing are within the
commercial and residential property markets. Investment
intentions also softened ahead of the referendum and appear
to have weakened further since. In addition, consumer
confidence has fallen to below past average levels. Net trade,
however, is likely to be boosted by the depreciation in sterling
in the near term (Section 2.2). The rest of this section
considers the evidence across these areas of spending before
setting out the overall near-term outlook for activity
(Section 2.3).
2.1 Domestic demand
Corporate spending
Business investment fell in 2016 Q1 (Table 2.B) and is
projected to continue to fall in the near term. Survey
measures of investment intentions generally softened during
the first half of the year (Chart 2.2), and those surveys
conducted since the referendum (the diamonds in Chart 2.2)
point to further weakness. That was most apparent in the
Deloitte CFO Survey of large companies, which reported a
sharp fall following the referendum; large companies account
for a disproportionately greater share of business investment.
The Agents’ contacts also report that the decision to leave the
European Union is likely to weigh on capital spending (see the
box on page 15). The Agents’ investment intentions scores fell
towards zero in July, indicating broadly flat investment
spending over the next twelve months. Contacts also report
that they are yet to fully process the implications of the
referendum vote over the near and long term: investment
plans will continue to be revised as new business plans
develop.
The current heightened level of uncertainty (Chart 2.1) may
persist for some time, and is likely to weigh on business
investment growth. Companies are likely to be facing
uncertainty about the terms of future trading arrangements,
Table 2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in May Developments now anticipated
Cost of credit Revised up slightly
• Credit spreads to be broadly flat in 2016. • Credit spreads to increase slightly.
Consumer spending Revised down
• Quarterly consumption growth of between
½% and ¾%.
• Quarterly consumption growth to
slow gradually to around ¼% in
2017 Q1.
Housing market Revised down
• Mortgage approvals to average around
75,000 a month in 2016 H2, following a
period of volatility.
• Rates of increase in the main indices of
national house prices to average around ½%
per month.
• Quarterly housing investment growth to be
volatile, averaging ¾% over 2016.
• Mortgage approvals to average
56,000 a month.
• The average of Halifax and
Nationwide price indices to decline
a little over the next year.
• Quarterly growth in housing
investment to average -1%.
Business investment Revised down
• Business investment to fall in Q2, grow only
modestly in Q3 and rebound from Q4.
• Business investment to fall by
around 1¾% a quarter, on average.
Table 2.B Business investment fell, while household consumption
growth picked up in Q1
Expenditure components of demand(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
 Averages
 1998– 2008– 2010– 2013– 2015 2015 2016
 2007 09 12 14 H1 H2 Q1
Household consumption(b) 0.9 -0.6 0.2 0.5 0.8 0.6 0.8
Private sector investment 0.7 -4.4 1.6 1.1 1.6 0.0 0.7
of which, business investment(c) 0.6 -3.0 1.9 0.8 1.3 -0.3 -0.6
of which, private sector
housing investment 0.8 -7.4 0.8 2.8 2.4 0.6 3.3
Private sector final domestic
demand 0.8 -1.3 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.5 0.7
Government consumption
and investment(c) 0.8 0.9 -0.1 0.4 0.7 0.1 0.0
Final domestic demand 0.8 -0.8 0.4 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.6
Change in inventories(d)(e) 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.2 0.3
Alignment adjustment(e) 0.0 -0.1 0.0 0.1 -0.4 0.3 -0.7
Domestic demand(f) 0.8 -0.8 0.4 0.8 0.3 0.7 0.3
‘Economic’ exports(g) 1.1 -1.1 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.5 -0.4
‘Economic’ imports(g) 1.4 -1.2 0.8 1.1 0.9 1.9 0.1
Net trade(e)(g) -0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.1 0.0 -0.2 -0.2
Real GDP at market prices 0.7 -0.7 0.4 0.7 0.3 0.6 0.4
Memo: nominal GDP at
market prices 1.2 -0.2 0.9 1.0 0.7 0.2 1.0
(a) Chained-volume measures unless otherwise stated.
(b) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Investment data take account of the transfer of nuclear reactors from the public corporation sector to
central government in 2005 Q2.
(d) Excludes the alignment adjustment.
(e) Percentage point contributions to quarterly growth of real GDP.
(f) Includes acquisitions less disposals of valuables.
(g) Excluding the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC) fraud.
 Section 2 Demand and output 15
Agents’ survey on the impact on businesses of
the vote to leave the European Union
The Bank’s Agents surveyed a range of contacts with the aim
of understanding how the vote to leave the European Union is
expected to affect their businesses over the coming year. The
questions asked about expected effects on capital spending,
corporate transactions (such as mergers and acquisitions
activity), hiring activity, turnover and prices over the coming
twelve months. The survey covered around 270 businesses in
the month or so following the referendum result, with a total
UK employment of 1.2 million people.(1)
The survey results relate to the marginal effect of the vote on
each business aspect: whether the vote would have a positive
or negative expected effect on turnover, for example, rather
than whether it would lead to an absolute rise or fall in
turnover over the coming year.
Overall, respondents expected a negative effect from the vote
on turnover, capital spending and hiring activity over the next
twelve months (Table 1). Output prices were expected to be
boosted, on balance, as the rise in imported costs following
the decline in sterling is passed through. That upward price
effect suggests the effect on activity in real terms is more
negative than that shown for turnover.
Across sectors, the expected effects on turnover were most
negative for business services and construction (Chart A).
In contrast, for manufacturing there was a slight positive
effect on balance, reflecting an expected boost to export
demand from the fall in sterling. But exports overall were
expected to be broadly unaffected, as that positive effect was
offset by an adverse impact on services exports associated
with lower commercial real estate and mergers activity by
overseas investors.
On corporate pricing, downward pressure on prices was
expected for professional and financial services and
construction, reflecting a weaker outlook for demand. In
contrast, for consumer services firms, any downward pressure
from demand was expected to be more than offset by the
pass-through of higher import prices.
Expected effects on capital spending and hiring activity were
negative across all sectors, on balance, but particularly so for
construction businesses (Chart B).
Consistent with the survey results, Agents’ scores for
companies’ investment and employment intentions have
weakened in absolute terms since the referendum result.
Those scores point to broadly unchanged levels of staff
numbers and capital spending over the next six and
twelve months respectively.
(1) The results shown are weighted by employment within the companies, and then
re-weighted by sectoral employment shares in aggregate ONS data to be more
representative of the economy as a whole.
Table 1 Negative effects are expected on business activity over
the next year
Survey responses on the impact of the vote to leave the EU on business
Proportion of companies, weighted by employment (per cent)(a)
 Substantially Slightly No Slightly Substantially Net
 increase increase effect reduce reduce balance(b)
Capital spending 0 0 40 51 9 -34
Corporate transactions 0 1 84 11 3 -8
Hiring activity 0 3 43 49 6 -29
Turnover 1 12 35 42 11 -25
of which, exports 1 28 47 20 5 0
Prices 4 32 50 14 1 12
(a) Results are weighted by employment within the companies, and then re-weighted by sectoral employment
shares in aggregate ONS data.
(b) When calculating the net balance of responses, half weight is given to those responding slightly increase or
slightly reduce, and full weight is given to those that have responded substantially increase or substantially
reduce.
+
–
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Manufacturing Consumer
services
Professional
and financial
services
Other
business
services
Construction
Turnover
Prices
Per cent
Chart A Only manufacturers expected a positive effect
on turnover; upward effects are expected on consumer
prices
Balance of survey responses for turnover and prices by sector
–
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Capital spending
Hiring activity
Manufacturing Consumer
services
Professional
and financial
services
Other
business
services
Construction
Per cent
Chart B Negative effects on hiring and investment are
expected across all sectors
Balance of survey responses for capital spending and hiring
activity by sector
16 Inflation Report August 2016
as well as the outlook for domestic and foreign demand. As
explained in the box on pages 14–15 of the May Report, a
period of heightened uncertainty tends to be associated with
firms delaying some decisions with sunk costs and long-term
pay-offs, such as capital investment.
Slower demand growth is also projected to dampen
investment spending over the near term. A weaker domestic
demand outlook would reduce expected future profits,
limiting the incentive to invest. The potential boost to profits
on exports from the depreciation of sterling, however,
(Section 2.3) may encourage some firms to invest in additional
exporting capacity.
The incentive to invest also depends on its cost. Excluding
buildings (around a quarter of investment spending),
investment is relatively import-intensive. The recent
depreciation in sterling will raise the cost of imported
investment goods, which could deter some spending. As well
as the cost of capital goods, investment also depends on the
cost of finance. There are few signs of any marked tightening
in corporate credit conditions. The overall cost of debt
financing in capital markets has been broadly unchanged since
the referendum (Section 1), and industry contacts report that
bank lending remains available on similar terms to prior to the
referendum. Loans to businesses continued to grow in
2016 Q2 (Table 2.C), but lending growth is projected to slow
in the near term, reflecting weaker demand for credit rather
than changes in domestic credit supply. As discussed in the
Credit Conditions Review, the major UK lenders anticipated a
slowing in the demand for corporate credit, in part reflecting
some investment decisions being delayed and a slowing in
mergers and acquisitions activity. Foreign direct investment
(FDI) flows into the United Kingdom are expected to soften,
given the uncertainty over the United Kingdom’s future
trading arrangements.
The commercial real estate market
Commercial real estate (CRE) prices and activity can affect
companies’ spending in a number of ways. Some companies
— particularly small and medium-sized businesses — use CRE
as collateral for borrowing. Fluctuations in CRE prices can,
therefore, affect their access to finance. In addition, around a
quarter of investment reflects spending on new and existing
buildings, which could be dampened by weaker sentiment.
CRE activity fell significantly ahead of the referendum
(Chart 2.3), and prospects for the CRE market have since
weakened further. That fall in activity appeared, in part, to
reflect a rise in uncertainty, while industry contacts also
reported some perceptions of prices being near their peak in
certain areas. Since the referendum, share prices of UK real
estate investment trusts have fallen sharply, and a number of
open-ended funds investing in the CRE market suspended
redemptions due to liquidity pressures as investors sought to
+
–
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Differences from averages since 2000 (number of standard deviations)
Agents
CBI
CIPS(b)
BCC
EEF
Deloitte(c)
Chart 2.2 Investment intentions have generally
weakened since 2015
Survey measures of investment intentions(a)
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, Deloitte, EEF, Markit/CIPS and Bank calculations.
(a) Net percentage balance of respondents reporting that they expect to increase investment
over the next twelve months, unless otherwise stated. Agents, BCC and CBI measures
weight together sectoral surveys using shares in real business investment. CIPS and
EEF measures correspond to the manufacturing sector only. BCC and Deloitte data are
non seasonally adjusted. The diamonds show the available post-referendum data.
(b) Net percentage balance of monthly increases in new orders to investment goods
manufacturers.
(c) Data available from 2010 Q3. The 2016 Q2 Deloitte CFO Survey was conducted during
28 June to 11 July.
Table 2.C The amount of net external finance raised by
companies continued to rise in 2016 Q2
Net external finance raised by private non-financial corporations(a)
£ billions
 Quarterly averages
 2003– 2009– 2013– 2015 2016 2016
 08 12 14 Q1 Q2
Loans 11.6 -6.2 -1.5 1.3 6.0 6.2
Bonds(b)(c) 2.9 3.3 3.0 3.1 9.2 1.2
Equities(b) -2.1 1.3 0.2 1.1 0.4 1.2
Commercial paper(b) 0.0 -0.4 -0.3 1.5 1.2 -2.3
Total(d) 12.9 -2.0 1.5 6.3 14.3 6.6
(a) Includes sterling and foreign currency funds from UK monetary financial institutions and capital markets.
(b) Non seasonally adjusted.
(c) Includes stand-alone and programme bonds.
(d) As component series are not all seasonally adjusted, the total may not equal the sum of its components.
0
5
10
15
20
25
2003 05 07 09 11 13 15
Total United Kingdom
Gross quarterly flows, £ billions
Of which by
 overseas investors
Chart 2.3 CRE transactions fell in 2016 H1
UK CRE transactions(a)
Sources: The Property Archive and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are non seasonally adjusted.
 Section 2 Demand and output 17
divest from the sector. The latest Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors (RICS) commercial property market
survey reported a significant weakening in occupier demand
following the referendum, and a sharp fall in investor enquiries
— particularly from foreign investors. These moves are
consistent with a further weakening in activity in the sector.
Reflecting weak demand and activity, CRE prices are also likely
to fall over the near term. The RICS survey balance of price
expectations turned negative in July, and around a third of
respondents reported that the market was in the early stages
of a downturn, with that share rising to over half for the
London region.
The housing market
Developments in the housing market can also be important
for investment and wider activity. As described in the
May Report, the pre-announced rise in stamp duty in
April 2016 led to some housing transactions that would
otherwise have taken place later in the year to be brought
forward. The sharp fall in transactions in 2016 Q2 was
therefore broadly consistent with expectations, given the
surge before April (Chart 2.4). House price growth has also
slowed over the past few months. The average of the Halifax
and Nationwide indices grew by 1% in Q2, having grown by
2% in 2016 Q1.
Forward-looking indicators suggest that both housing
transactions and house price inflation may decline further
(Chart 2.5). The latest RICS housing survey reported sharp
falls in the balances of price and sales expectations over the
next three months; the price expectations balance fell to its
lowest level since 2011, and the balance of sales expectations
fell to its lowest ever level. The net balances of reported new
enquiries and selling instructions have also fallen significantly
in recent months.
Heightened uncertainty ahead of the referendum and
following its outcome have probably weighed on activity.
Given the relatively large costs associated with buying and
selling houses, such as estate agent and legal fees as well as
stamp duty, some households are likely to delay buying or
moving house until they are more certain about the outlook.
Moreover, if on balance households’ expectations of future
income fall, that will weigh on their demand for housing,
putting downward pressure on prices. Lower expectations of
future capital gains on housing could also dampen demand
and, as expectations may be guided by actual house price
moves, this could amplify the near-term weakness in the
housing market.
Credit supply, however, is likely to continue to support
housing demand. As discussed in the latest Credit Conditions
Review, the major UK lenders expected the cost and
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Thousands per month
Housing transactions(a)
Mortgage approvals for
 house purchase
Chart 2.4 Housing transactions remain subdued
following a spike in March
Mortgage approvals for house purchase and housing transactions
Sources: Bank of England and HM Revenue and Customs.
(a) Number of residential property transactions for values of £40,000 or above.
+
–
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Differences from averages since 2000 (number of standard deviations)
New instructions
 to sell
New buyer enquiries
Price expectations(a)
Sales to stocks
Chart 2.5 Forward-looking housing market indicators
have deteriorated in recent months
RICS housing market indicators
Source: Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
(a) Net percentage balance of respondents reporting that they expect prices to rise over the
next three months.
18 Inflation Report August 2016
availability of secured credit to be little changed over the near
term. Lending growth is, however, projected to slow,
reflecting subdued demand.
Overall, house prices are projected to decline a little over the
near term, while the level of transactions remains broadly flat.
The path for transactions, in part, reflects the recent drag
associated with the rise in stamp duty unwinding over time —
which will boost the number of transactions — offset by
greater uncertainty associated with the referendum outcome.
A reassessment by Bank staff of prospects for housing market
activity prior to the referendum also lowered the projected
path for transactions. The proportion of existing
owner-occupiers moving house has remained low since the
financial crisis, despite the past improvement in credit
conditions, which appears in part to have been associated with
the increasing average age of the population. This recent
trend is now judged to be more persistent.
Subdued housing activity and weaker sentiment are expected
to weigh on housing-related investment in the near term.
This, in part, reflects subdued spending on services associated
with property transactions. As in the past, weaker housing
market sentiment is also projected to dampen investment in
new buildings; for example, large falls in housing transactions
during the early stages of the financial crisis were soon
followed by reductions in house building (Chart 2.6).
Household spending
Household consumption growth has remained solid in recent
quarters (Table 2.B), but growth is projected to slow over the
second half of this year.
The rate of consumption growth depends in part on
households’ current and expected future income growth. It is
also sensitive to the degree of confidence that households
have in their expectations, as well as their ability to access
credit to accommodate possible fluctuations in income.
Robust real income growth has supported consumption
growth over the past year, but a combination of muted wage
growth and higher import prices following the depreciation of
sterling (Section 4) are projected to contribute to a slowing in
real income growth over 2016 H2.
Correspondingly, households’ income expectations already
appear to have fallen. The GfK measure of households’
expectations of their personal financial situation had been
above average levels during 2016 Q2, but fell sharply in July to
slightly below its average (Chart 2.7). Other indicators of
consumer sentiment have also declined (Chart 2.7). These
falls may, at least in part, reflect higher uncertainty following
the outcome of the referendum. A rise in uncertainty could
lead to an increase in saving as a precaution against the risk of
a negative outcome, such as becoming unemployed;
+
–
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
1997 2000 03 06 09 12 15
Major purchases(b)
Differences from averages since 1997 (number of standard deviations)
General economic
 situation expectations(a)
Personal financial situation
 expectations(a)
Unemployment
 expectations(c)
 (inverted)
Chart 2.7 Consumer confidence has fallen
Measures of consumer confidence and unemployment
expectations
Source: GfK (research carried out on behalf of the European Commission).
(a) Net balance of respondents reporting that they expect their personal financial situation or
the general economic situation to improve over the next twelve months.
(b) Net balance of respondents reporting that, in view of the general economic situation, now is
the right time for people to make major purchases such as furniture or electrical goods.
(c) Net balance of respondents expecting that the number of people unemployed will rise over
the next twelve months.
+
–
60
40
20
0
20
40
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Improvements to existing buildings
Newly built dwellings
Costs associated with housing
 transactions
Private sector housing
 investment growth
 (per cent)
Percentage points
Chart 2.6 Falls in property transactions have been
accompanied by lower house building in the past
Contributions to four-quarter private sector housing investment
growth(a)
(a) Chained-volume measure.
 Section 2 Demand and output 19
households’ expectations for UK unemployment rose slightly
in July, but remain close to average levels.
Consumption growth has been closely correlated with house
price growth in the past (Chart 2.8). Although that
relationship in part reflects common factors driving both, such
as income, a lower path for house prices could dampen
spending through a number of channels. Lower house prices
reduce the value of housing equity that homeowners can
borrow against and some homeowners may reduce spending if
the value of their property falls. Any fall in house prices could
also affect consumption through broader confidence channels.
Credit conditions are projected to remain broadly unchanged,
thereby continuing to support spending growth. A sharp
tightening in credit conditions during the financial crisis
amplified the effects of weaker income on consumption. The
subsequent reduction in household deposit and lending rates
(Chart 2.9) and improved access to credit will have supported
consumption growth since then. Household interest rates
have been stable at historically low levels in recent quarters
and, as discussed in the 2016 Q2 Credit Conditions Review,
lenders expect personal loan and mortgage rates to remain
broadly stable.
Overall, consumer spending growth is projected to slow
gradually in 2016 H2 as real income growth slows; supported
by the stance of credit conditions, the rate of saving is
projected to remain broadly stable. There is, however, a great
deal of uncertainty around the path of savings. On the one
hand, households may be inclined to save more, in response to
heightened uncertainty and reduced confidence. On the other
hand, the saving ratio is now estimated to have remained
broadly stable over the past few years (see Chart B in the box
on page 20), and so households may feel able to reduce their
rate of saving for a period to support spending in the face of
slowing real income growth. Perhaps consistent with that,
some timely indicators of consumer spending, such as retail
footfall, do not yet point to a material slowing in growth.
Government spending
The MPC’s forecast is conditioned on the tax and spending
policies set out in the Government’s March Budget, which
imply a continued fiscal consolidation. This consolidation will
continue to dampen growth in households’ and companies’
incomes. The projected slowing in private sector income
growth is likely to be cushioned to some degree by features of
the tax and welfare system. For example, to the extent that
unemployment increases (Section 3), some households’
incomes will be supported by out of work benefit payments.
The longer-term implications for the public finances will
depend on a range of factors and, in particular, the prospects
for the United Kingdom’s future supply growth (Section 3).
+
–
+
–
House prices(a)
 (left-hand scale)
Household consumption(b)
 (right-hand scale)
Percentage change on a year earlier Percentage change on a year earlier
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
1984 88 92 96 2000 04 08 12 16
Chart 2.8 Consumption growth has been closely
correlated with house price growth over the past
Household consumption and house prices
Sources: Halifax/Markit, Nationwide, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) House prices are an average of the Halifax and Nationwide measures. Nationwide house
price data have been seasonally adjusted by Bank staff.
(b) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households. Data
available up to 2016 Q1.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2006 08 10 12 14 16
New fixed-rate
 time deposit(b)
Per cent
£10,000 unsecured loan
Two-year fixed-rate
 mortgage,
 90% loan to value
Two-year
 fixed-rate mortgage,
 75% loan to value
Chart 2.9 Household interest rates remain at
historically low levels
Household deposit and lending interest rates(a)
(a) Sterling-only end-month quoted rates, unless otherwise stated. The Bank’s interest rate
series are weighted average rates from a sample of banks and building societies with
products meeting the specific criteria (see www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/iadb/
notesiadb/household_int.aspx). Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Average monthly effective rate.
20 Inflation Report August 2016
Revisions to the National Accounts
The latest National Accounts data have been revised to make
them consistent with the Blue Book, an annual ONS
publication that incorporates methodological improvements
and a wider range of information than in earlier estimates.
This box sets out the main revisions following this year’s
process.
Revisions to real GDP (Chart A) have been relatively small,
with larger revisions to nominal GDP. That mainly reflects an
improvement to the ONS’s approach to measuring the value
of imputed rents — an estimate of the value of housing
services consumed by homeowners — which has broadly
similar effects on estimates of both income and consumption.
Those revisions to income and consumption are larger before
2010, as the ONS had already partially implemented the new
approach in the more recent period (Chart B).
The slowdown in GDP growth since 2014 currently appears to
have been somewhat more pronounced than previously
estimated (Chart A). Within that, household consumption
growth was revised down marginally. Income, and in
particular, wages and salaries growth has been revised up,
consistent with administrative tax data. Consumption now
appears to have grown more closely in line with incomes since
2013, with the rate of saving broadly flat rather than falling as
in previous estimates (Chart B).
The counterpart to higher household savings has been a lower
rate of domestic corporate savings (Chart C). The corporate
financial balance now appears to be close to balance, rather
than in surplus. Revisions to the current account have been
relatively small.
+
–
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
2007 09 11 13 15
Latest
Percentage changes on a year earlier
At the time of
 the May Report
Chart A GDP growth has slowed since 2014
GDP(a)
(a) Chained-volume measures at market prices.
+
–
8
4
0
4
8
12
16
2007 09 11 13 15
Revision to post-tax income (percentage points)(b)
Revision to consumption (inverted, percentage points)(b)
Latest ONS estimate of the saving ratio(c)
Saving ratio estimate at the time of the May Report(c)
Per cent
Chart B The estimated saving ratio now appears to have
been broadly flat since 2013
Revisions to household income, consumption and the saving
ratio(a)
(a) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(b) Contributions to the total revision in the saving ratio.
(c) Percentages of household post-tax income.
+
–
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2007 09 11 13 15
Government(b)
Percentages of nominal GDP
Households(a)
Private non-financial
 corporations
Current account
Solid lines: latest data
Dashed lines: data at the
 time of the May Report
Chart C Revisions have reduced the size of the
household financial deficit over the recent past
Financial balances by sector
(a) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(b) Excludes public corporations.
 Section 2 Demand and output 21
2.2 The current account and net trade
All else equal, the depreciation in sterling since the
referendum (Section 1) will support net trade volumes over
the near term. One channel is through higher import prices
(Section 4), which will encourage UK consumers and
businesses to substitute towards domestically produced goods
and services. That, combined with lower projected domestic
demand growth (Section 2.3), will dampen import growth over
the near term.
The recent depreciation should also support exports. It will
raise exporters’ profit margins, and could encourage new and
existing exporters to expand production. Goods export
volumes picked up in the three months to May after falls in
early 2016 and the second half of 2015, and the Agents’
contacts report somewhat greater optimism for export growth
over the next year.
The extent of the improvement in export growth will,
however, depend on how UK companies and their trading
partners react to the vote to leave the European Union.
UK exporters or international customers could be dissuaded
from entering into new trading contracts if either attaches
some weight to the possibility of reduced trading access in the
future. That would also dampen imports, since exports are
relatively import-intensive.
The current account reflects the balance of all payment flows,
including trade, between the United Kingdom and other
countries. While the current account deficit remained very
wide at 6.9% of GDP in 2016 Q1 (Chart 2.10), it is projected
to narrow over the near term. That narrowing reflects both
improvements to the trade balance — the nominal value of
exports minus imports — and the value of net investment
income flows. As UK residents hold more foreign currency
assets than they have foreign currency liabilities, the
depreciation will have increased the sterling value of the net
international investment position.(1) It will also therefore
reduce the primary income deficit, which is the sterling value
of income received by UK residents on foreign direct and
portfolio investment relative to that paid abroad on domestic
liabilities. An increasing primary income deficit has been the
main reason behind the increase in the current account deficit
over the recent past.
2.3 Near-term outlook for GDP
According to the preliminary estimate, GDP grew by 0.6% in
2016 Q2 (Chart 2.11), above the 0.3% projected in May.
+
–
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2013–14 2015 2016 Q1 2016 Q2
Other services(b) (19%)
Other production(c) (5%)
Construction (6%)
Manufacturing (10%)
Business-focused services (33%)
Consumer-focused services (27%)
Output gross value added (GVA)
 growth (per cent)
Percentage points
Chart 2.11 Output growth was 0.6% in Q2
Contributions to average quarterly GVA growth by sector(a)
(a) Chained-volume measures at basic prices. Contributions may not sum to the total due to
rounding. Service industries are defined as ‘consumer-focused’ if the share of their output
that is directly consumed exceeds the share of output that is sold to other businesses to be
used as intermediate inputs, while the reverse is true for ‘business-focused’ service sectors.
Calculated using the United Kingdom Input-Output Analytical Tables 2010. Figures in
parentheses are weights in nominal GDP in 2013.
(b) Other services includes: public administration and defence; health services and education.
(c) Other production includes: utilities; extraction and agriculture.
+
–
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Secondary income
Primary income
Trade balance
Current account balance
Percentages of nominal GDP
Chart 2.10 The wider current account deficit since
mid-2011 has mainly been due to a lower primary
income balance
UK current account
(1) Estimates suggest that around 60% of the stock of external liabilities is denominated
in foreign currency, compared with more than 90% of the stock of external assets:
see Bénétrix, A, Lane, P and Shambaugh, J (2015), ‘International currency exposures,
valuation effects and the global financial crisis’, Journal of International Economics,
Vol. 96(S1), pages S98–S109 and accompanying data;
www.philiplane.org/BLSJIE2015data.xls.
22 Inflation Report August 2016
Underlying that growth, there was a pickup in activity within
the manufacturing and utilities sectors, while service sector
growth slowed. While manufacturing growth is likely to be
supported by demand for UK exports (Section 2.2), services
growth is likely to slow further in response to softer domestic
demand (Section 2.1). Strong quarterly growth within the
utilities sector appears to have been erratic and will probably
reverse in Q3; following a sharp rise in April, activity within
that sector fell back somewhat in May.
The precise scale of the drag on near-term activity from
heightened uncertainty is difficult to judge at present. Official
activity data are yet to span the post-referendum period.
Business surveys relating to activity in July have, however,
begun to emerge. The Markit/CIPS measures of business
activity — which have on average been a better gauge of
official output data than most other survey measures —
reported a sharp fall in output, alongside a steeper fall in
expectations (Chart 2.12).(1) Their current levels, if sustained,
would be consistent with a contraction in output in Q3.
Contacts of the Agents also report a slowing in activity
growth, albeit consistent with slightly positive growth. While
the Lloyds measure of business confidence, which recovered
much of its post-referendum fall in the July release, points to a
more gradual slowing.
Overall, the available evidence suggests little growth in GDP in
the second half of the year, and growth is projected to slow to
0.1% in 2016 Q3 (Chart 2.13). Household spending growth is
projected to slow gradually, as consumers respond to a
slowing in income growth, while investment spending
continues to decline. Some firms could also run down their
stocks due to expectations of weaker near-term demand,
which would slow output growth by more than the softening
in demand growth.
+
–
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Differences from averages since 2000 (number of standard deviations)
Expectations(c)
Output(b)
Chart 2.12 The Markit/CIPS survey output and
expectations indices fell significantly in July
Survey indicators of output growth and expected output growth(a)
Sources: Markit/CIPS and Bank calculations.
(a) Produced by weighting together balances for services, manufacturing and construction using
their shares in nominal GDP in 2013.
(b) Net percentage of companies saying that output (manufacturing and construction) or
business activity (services) increased over the month.
(c) Net percentage of companies reporting that they expect business activity to rise over the
next twelve months (services and construction) or that new orders have increased over the
month (manufacturing).
+
–
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2012 13 14 15 16
Projection(c)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
Projection at the time
 of the May Report(c)
GDP
Estimate implied by the mode
 of the latest backcast(b)
Chart 2.13 GDP growth is projected to slow in 2016 Q3
Output growth and Bank staff’s near-term projection(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures. GDP is at market prices.
(b) The latest backcast, shown to the left of the vertical line, is a judgement about the path for
GDP in the mature estimate of the data. The observation for 2016 Q3, to the right of the
vertical line, is consistent with the MPC’s central projection.
(c) The magenta diamond shows Bank staff’s central projection for the preliminary estimate of
GDP growth in 2016 Q2 at the time of the May Report. The green diamond shows the
current staff projection for GDP growth in 2016 Q3. The bands on either side of the
diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean squared error
of past Bank staff forecasts for quarterly GDP growth made since 2004.
(1) The quarterly Markit/CIPS output indicator, consistent with Chart 2.12, has a
correlation coefficient of 0.65 with GDP growth over 1997 Q2 to 2016 Q2.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 23
Output growth is projected to slow sharply in Q3, reflecting
heightened uncertainty following the referendum (Section 2).
In the near term, firms are likely to take time to adjust
capacity in response to a more subdued demand outlook;
capacity pressures within businesses are expected to soften,
while surveys of recruitment intentions suggest that prospects
for labour demand growth have weakened (Chart 3.1). As a
result, average hours worked per worker are projected to fall,
employment growth to slow and unemployment to rise
(Section 3.1). The margin of slack in the labour market and in
the overall economy is therefore projected to widen over the
next year (Section 3.2).
The extent to which output recovers further ahead will in part
depend on labour supply growth (Section 3.3) and potential
productivity growth (Section 3.4). Productivity growth is
projected to weaken in Q3 and thereafter be more subdued
than anticipated three months ago. In part that reflects the
effects of elevated uncertainty on investment both in physical
capital and in skills and innovation. There is significant
uncertainty around the path for potential supply; it will be
sensitive to the eventual trading arrangements between the
United Kingdom and its economic partners, and to the
transition to those new arrangements (Section 5). The box on
page 29 sets out some of the channels through which any
changes in the United Kingdom’s trading arrangements might
affect long-term potential supply.
3.1 Labour demand
Although growth in employment over the first half of 2016
remained robust, that was accounted for by a large rise in
self-employment (Table 3.A). Growth in the number of
employees eased to slightly below its pre-crisis average rate in
2016 H1, and most employment surveys have fallen back since
late 2015 (Chart 3.1). That softening is likely primarily to have
reflected a normalisation in the labour market, as spare
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
BCC (intentions)(b)
CBI (intentions)(b)
Agents (intentions)(c)
Manpower (intentions)(b)
REC (intentions)(d)
CIPS (reported)(e)
Differences from averages since 2000 (number of standard deviations)
+
–
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, Manpower, Markit/CIPS, ONS, REC and
Bank calculations.
(a) Measures for the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and
services), CBI (manufacturing, financial services, business/consumer/professional services
and distributive trades) and CIPS (construction, manufacturing and services) are weighted
together using employee shares from Workforce Jobs. The Manpower and REC data cover
the whole economy. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Net percentage balance of companies expecting their workforce to increase over the next
three months.
(c) End-quarter observation. The scores refer to companies’ employment intentions over the
next six months. The diamond for Q3 shows data for July.
(d) Quarterly average. Recruitment agencies’ reports on the demand for permanent staff
placements.
(e) Quarterly average. Companies’ reported change in employment compared with the previous
month. The diamond for Q3 shows data for July.
Chart 3.1 Many survey indicators of employment
softened ahead of the referendum, and those available
since have fallen further
Survey indicators of employment intentions and reported changes
in employment(a)
3 Supply and the labour market
Reflecting the weaker near-term outlook for output, capacity pressures are likely to soften in the
second half of 2016. Surveys of recruitment intentions suggest that prospects for labour demand
growth have eased. In part reflecting that, average hours worked are projected to fall and
unemployment to pick up, leading to a widening in the degree of slack in the economy. The extent
to which output recovers further ahead will depend partly on developments in supply, which will be
sensitive to the eventual trading arrangements between the United Kingdom and its economic
partners. In the near term, the outlook for supply growth is weaker than in May.
24 Inflation Report August 2016
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Agents(b)
Deloitte(c)
Institute of Directors(d)
Percentages of respondents n.a. n.a.
Increase (i)
No effect (ii)
Decrease
somewhat (iii)
Decrease
significantly (iv)
Redundancies (v)
Chart 3.2 Following the referendum result, firms expect
to revise down recruitment plans
Post-referendum surveys of the expected effect on recruitment of
the vote to leave the European Union(a)
capacity was absorbed following very rapid employment
growth over 2012–15. The level of vacancies relative to the
size of the labour force remained above its pre-crisis average in
Q2, suggesting that labour demand remained robust.
Nonetheless, the slowing in output growth since 2014 and
rising uncertainty ahead of the referendum (Section 2) may
also have moderated employment growth.
There is at present very little evidence to assess how the
labour market is evolving following the referendum. Official
data for the post-referendum period will not be available for
some time, and there are currently limited survey data.
Further, many businesses are likely to take time to reassess
their employment plans. Those indicators that are available
suggest that labour demand growth is likely to slow in the
near term. Surveys of changes in companies’ employment and
their employment intentions conducted since the referendum
(the diamonds in Chart 3.1) have fallen and are now below
their past averages. Additionally, those surveys that have
asked specifically about the impact of the vote indicate, on
average, that over half of firms expect the outcome to reduce
recruitment, in some cases significantly (Chart 3.2). There is,
however, less evidence that firms are expecting to make
redundancies in response to the result. Contacts of the Bank’s
Agents report that labour demand in the construction and
consumer services sectors is likely to be the most affected by
the referendum (see the box on page 15). Initial evidence from
weekly online vacancies, a higher frequency indicator,
corroborates a softening in labour demand growth since the
referendum.
There is, therefore, considerable uncertainty over the precise
extent, composition and timing of any slowing in labour
demand growth. It will depend, in part, on how severe and
long-lasting businesses expect any slowdown to be and how
they expect to be affected by changes in the United Kingdom’s
relationships with its major trading partners (Section 5). The
degree to which firms moderate their overall labour demand
growth may also depend on the extent to which they can
reduce wage growth to offset the impact from weaker output
growth and higher imported costs on their revenues and
profitability (Section 4).
Reductions in labour demand tend to be associated with
reductions in average hours worked (Chart 3.3). Average
hours, which edged down over 2016 H1, are therefore
projected to fall further in the near term. That reduction is
likely to occur in part through less overtime, the most flexible
element of hours worked.
Reductions in labour demand also tend to be associated with
increases in unemployment, either by firms cutting back on
recruiting new workers or increasing redundancies. In recent
years, as the labour market has normalised and vacancies have
increased, there has been a steady pickup in the rate at which
Sources: Deloitte, Institute of Directors and Bank calculations.
(a) The survey questions are shown in footnotes (b) to (d), together with the mapping from the
answers to the bars shown on the chart. Only the Institute of Directors survey asked about
redundancies.
(b) Following the vote to leave the EU, what effects do you expect on hiring over the following
twelve months? Substantially increase (i); Slightly increase (i); No effect (ii); Slightly
reduce (iii); Substantially reduce (iv).
(c) Overall how do you think a UK exit from the EU will affect your business’s decisions on hiring
over the next three years? Increase significantly (i); Increase somewhat (i); No change (ii);
Decrease somewhat (iii); Decrease significantly (iv).
(d) How will the result of the referendum affect your primary organisation’s hiring intentions?
The pace of hiring will increase (i); We will continue hiring at the same pace (ii); We will
continue hiring, but at a decreased pace (iii); We will freeze hiring new staff (iv); We will
make redundancies (v); Not applicable (ii); Don’t know (not shown on chart; 9% of firms
responded with this option).
Table 3.A Growth in the number of employees has eased since
2015
Change in employment, and vacancies
 Quarterly averages
 2000– 2008– 2010– 2013– 2015 2016 2016
 07(a) 09 12 14 Q1 Q2
Change in employment(b) 70 -59 67 130 149 44 176
of which, employees(b) 55 -67 32 106 112 28 49
of which, self-employed and other(b)(c) 16 7 35 24 37 16 127
Vacancies to labour force ratio
(per cent)(d) 2.09 1.70 1.48 1.85 2.24 2.28 2.24
(a) Unless otherwise stated.
(b) Changes relative to the previous quarter in thousands. Figures for 2016 Q2 are data for the three months to
May 2016.
(c) Other comprises unpaid family workers and those on government-supported training and employment
programmes classified as being in employment.
(d) Excludes vacancies in agriculture, forestry and fishing. Average is 2001 Q2 to 2007. Figure for 2016 Q2
shows vacancies in June as a percentage of the number of people in the labour force in the three months to
May.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 25
unemployed people have found jobs and a fall in the rate at
which employed workers have become unemployed, both to
around their pre-crisis rates (Chart 3.4). In response to a
softening in labour demand, these trends are expected to be
partly reversed in coming quarters. Reflecting that, the
unemployment rate is expected to have risen modestly in July
(Chart 3.5) and to continue rising over the next year
(Section 5). That pickup would, though, only slightly reverse
the large decline seen in recent years. The unemployment rate
fell to 4.9% in the three months to May, having stood at
around 8% three years ago. There is, however, a great deal of
uncertainty over the precise path of unemployment.
A reduction in labour demand could also weigh on the
aggregate participation rate, by discouraging some people
from actively participating in the labour market. The
participation rate has been fairly stable in recent years,
reflecting two large but broadly offsetting factors: a decline in
the share of the population in the age groups most likely to
participate in the labour market, set against increased
participation among older people.(1) Overall, the participation
rate is projected to remain broadly stable.
3.2 Slack in the economy
In the near term, as growth in demand for their output
weakens, firms are likely only gradually to adjust their labour
and other resources in response. As a result, the margin of
spare capacity within firms is likely to widen. Survey measures
of capacity utilisation have, on average, fallen slightly in recent
quarters (Chart 3.6), consistent with increased spare capacity,
and are likely to fall further in the second half of 2016.
Slack in the labour market — the scope for total hours worked
to rise before it puts upward pressure on pay — is also
projected to widen in the near term as average hours fall and
unemployment rises (Section 3.1). As labour market slack
increases, measures of labour market tightness such as
recruitment difficulties would be expected to ease.
Recruitment difficulties reported by contacts of the Bank’s
Agents had already started to abate over 2016 H1 (Chart 3.7),
probably reflecting an easing in firms’ recruitment intentions
as well as a reduction in skills shortages as a result of staff
training and process redesign within firms.
Overall, the MPC judges that the margin of spare capacity in
the economy is likely to widen in the near term. That
increased slack in the economy will weigh on wage growth and
domestic inflationary pressure (Section 4).
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
1989 93 97 2001 05 09 13
Employment(a)
Average hours(a)
Growth in total hours worked
 (per cent)(a)(b)
GDP growth (per cent)(b)(c)
Percentage points
+
–
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Diamond and light bars are Bank staff projections for Q2, based on data to May.
(b) Percentage changes on a year earlier.
(c) Chained-volume measure at market prices, based on the backcast for the final estimate of
GDP.
Chart 3.3 Both average hours and employment tend to
fall in economic slowdowns
GDP growth and decomposition of growth in total hours worked
(1) For more details, see page 20 of the February Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/feb.pdf.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1998 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Per cent of employment Per cent of unemployment
Unemployment to
 employment
 (right-hand scale)
Employment to
 unemployment
 (left-hand scale)
Sources: Labour Force Survey (LFS) and Bank calculations.
(a) Two-quarter averages. Based on total LFS employment and unemployment of people aged 16–64.
Chart 3.4 The rates at which people move between
employment and unemployment had broadly
normalised in 2016 Q1
Flows between employment and unemployment(a)
26 Inflation Report August 2016
3.3 Labour supply
The extent to which output can recover further ahead will, in
part, be determined by developments in labour supply.
Overall, the outlook for labour supply growth is judged to be
broadly similar to that at the time of the May Report.
Growth in labour supply derives mainly from population
growth. Since the May Report, the Labour Force Survey data
have been revised to incorporate updated official population
estimates. These revisions had been anticipated and already
incorporated into the MPC’s projections and so contain little
news. Population growth is estimated to have been 0.7% in
the four quarters to 2016 Q1, broadly in line with its pre-crisis
average rate.
In the MPC’s projections, population growth evolves in line
with the ONS’s projection made in October 2015. Under
those projections, population growth slows over the next
three years, primarily due to a fall back in net migration. The
prospects for net migration at present are particularly
uncertain, and will depend on a number of factors, including
the United Kingdom’s relative economic performance and also
UK government policy in light of the referendum. As discussed
in the box on pages 30–31 of the May 2015 Report, while net
migration will contribute to labour supply, it will also
contribute to domestic demand, and so any implications for
inflationary pressure of a different path are likely to be
relatively small.
Another factor affecting potential labour supply growth is the
composition of unemployment: protracted periods of
unemployment typically make it more difficult for the
unemployed to find work, possibly because their skills become
less relevant to employers. The proportion of the workforce in
long-term unemployment has fallen in recent years, towards
its pre-crisis average (Chart 3.8). There is a risk that the
projected rise in aggregate unemployment (Section 3.1) is
associated with an increase in the long-term unemployment
rate over time, perhaps if there is a significant shift in the
composition of jobs. That would be likely to weigh on labour
supply and reduce somewhat the downward pressure on wage
growth from unemployment.
While average hours worked are likely to fall in the near term
(Section 3.1), there is a risk that the projected slowing in real
income growth (Section 2) could lead to an increase in the
desired hours of those in work and in the extent of
participation across the population. Desired hours of work and
participation tend to increase in response to weak real wage
growth as households attempt to offset the impact on their
income. For example, a greater proportion of those working
part-time may seek full-time work. This was the case during
the financial crisis and, although the number of part-time
workers who could not find full-time work has fallen in recent
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
1999 2003 07 11 15
Differences from 1999 Q1–2007 Q3 averages
(number of standard deviations)
BCC
Agents
CBI
+
–
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures are produced by weighting together measures from the Bank’s Agents
(manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the CBI
(manufacturing, financial services, business/consumer/professional services and distributive
trades) using shares in nominal value added. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted. The
diamond for Q3 shows data for July.
Chart 3.6 Companies’ capacity pressures have eased on
average
Survey indicators of capacity utilisation(a)
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
2013 14 15 16
Per cent
Projection
Three-month
 unemployment rate
Monthly projections
 in May
0.0
(a) The magenta diamonds show Bank staff’s central projections for the headline
unemployment rate for March, April, May and June 2016, at the time of the May Report. The
green diamonds show the current staff projections for the headline unemployment rate for
June, July, August and September 2016. The bands on either side of the diamonds show
uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean squared error of past Bank
staff forecasts for the three-month LFS unemployment rate.
Chart 3.5 Unemployment is expected to be around 5%
in the near term
Unemployment rate and Bank staff’s near-term projection(a)
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 27
years, it remains higher than prior to the crisis (Chart 3.9).
Were desired average hours and participation to increase, they
would provide support to labour supply (Section 5).
3.4 Productivity
Productivity fell sharply during the financial crisis, and it has
grown at a persistently weak rate since then. Four-quarter
growth in hourly productivity is expected to have been 0.4%
in 2016 Q2 (Chart 3.10), compared to its pre-crisis average
rate of 2.1%. There is significant uncertainty around the path
for productivity; it will be sensitive to the eventual trading
arrangements between the United Kingdom and its economic
partners, to the transition to those new arrangements and to
companies’ uncertainty about those arrangements (Section 5).
The box on page 29 sets out some of the channels through
which changes in the United Kingdom’s trading arrangements
could affect long-term potential supply, and productivity in
particular.
In the near term, measured productivity growth is projected to
slow, as companies take time to adjust their resources in
response to the weaker outlook for demand (Section 3.1). The
extent to which productivity can recover will depend in part
on underlying potential productivity growth. It is difficult to
judge what the implications of the referendum may be for the
outlook for potential productivity growth, but a number of
factors are likely to weigh on it.
Growth in productivity can be decomposed into changes in
capital per hour worked — the equipment and resources that
are available to produce output — and growth in total factor
productivity (TFP), the efficiency with which companies
combine their capital and labour inputs to produce output.
Elevated uncertainty about the United Kingdom’s future
trading arrangements and reduced confidence about the
outlook for demand are likely to drag on companies’
investment (Section 2), impeding expansion in the capital
stock. Heightened uncertainty may also weigh on companies’
intangible investment in skills and innovation and so on TFP
growth. It is also possible that, in some companies, effort
could be diverted away from producing output towards
planning for different possible trading arrangements. Further,
there may need to be some reallocation of resources in
response both to the fall in the exchange rate and, as
discussed in the box on page 29, to the changing composition
of demand for UK goods and services as the United Kingdom
changes its trading arrangements. That too could weigh on
TFP growth, with firms taking time to adjust production to
meet the new pattern of demand or being less able to
specialise in certain sectors.
Overall, measured productivity growth is projected to slow in
the near term as output growth slows. Looking through that
volatility, underlying potential productivity growth is
1992 96 2000 04 08 12 16 0
1
2
3
4
5
6 Per cent
Source: Labour Force Survey.
(a) Number of people reporting to the LFS that they are working part-time because they could
not find a full-time job, as a percentage of LFS total employment. Rolling three-month
measure. First data point is May 1992.
Chart 3.9 The number of part-time workers seeking
full-time work remains elevated
Part-time workers who could not find full-time work(a)
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Score
+
–
(a) Observations on a scale of -5 to +5, with positive scores indicating greater recruitment
difficulties in the most recent three months compared with a year earlier.
Chart 3.7 Companies’ recruitment difficulties have eased
Agents’ scores on recruitment difficulties(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
1993 95 97 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Under six months
Six to twelve months
Over twelve months
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The number of people unemployed in each duration category, divided by the economically
active population. Dashed lines are averages from 2002 to 2007.
Chart 3.8 Long-term unemployment has been falling
towards its pre-crisis average rate
Unemployment rates by duration(a)
28 Inflation Report August 2016
projected to be somewhat softer than anticipated at the time
of the May Report due to the effects of uncertainty on growth
in the capital stock and other resources used to produce
output, and in response to any gradual reallocation of
resources. The outlook for productivity growth is, however,
highly uncertain and there are substantial risks in both
directions (Section 5).
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Percentage change on a year earlier
+
–
(a) GDP is based on the backcast for the final estimate of GDP. The diamond shows Bank staff’s
forecast for 2016 Q2.
Chart 3.10 Productivity growth has been subdued in
recent years
Hourly labour productivity(a)
Table 3.B Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in May Developments now anticipated
Unemployment Revised up slightly
• Headline LFS unemployment rate to
reach 5% by end-2016.
• Unemployment rate fell to 4.9% in May,
and is expected to rise, reaching just over
5% by 2017 Q1.
Participation Broadly unchanged
• Labour market participation rate to
remain stable at around 63½%.
• Labour market participation rate to
remain stable at around 63½%.
Average hours Broadly unchanged
• Average hours to fall by ¾% during
2016 Q2–Q4.
• Average hours to fall by ¾% in the year
to 2017 Q1.
Productivity Revised down
• Quarterly hourly labour productivity to
grow at an average pace of around ½%.
• Quarterly hourly labour productivity
growth of around ¼%.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 29
Factors affecting the prospects for long-term
supply following the EU referendum
The long-term impact of the vote to leave the European Union
on the competitiveness of the UK economy and its supply
potential is highly uncertain, and will be sensitive to the
United Kingdom’s eventual trading arrangements with its
economic partners. This box sets out some of the factors that
might affect the long-term level of UK potential supply. The
MPC will continue to assess the prospects for potential supply
as the likely trading arrangements become clearer.
As part of the European Union, the United Kingdom has been
part of a single market in which there is free movement of
goods, capital and labour, and reduced barriers to trade in
services. Following the vote to leave the European Union,
there is considerable uncertainty over the eventual trading and
investment arrangements between the United Kingdom and
its economic partners, both in the European Union and
elsewhere, as well as over how quickly these are put in place.
Those arrangements, such as the extent of tariffs and
non-tariff barriers to trade, will influence the
United Kingdom’s trade and capital flows. A number of
studies suggest that the degree of openness of an economy to
trade and capital flows is an important determinant of income
and potential supply.(1) In particular, openness can influence
the extent of capital accumulation and labour supply, and how
efficiently capital and labour are combined to produce output,
known as total factor productivity (TFP). In part, TFP reflects
the degree of intangible investment in skills and innovation.
Evidence suggests that one way in which openness matters for
productivity is through foreign direct investment (FDI). FDI
has been shown to lead to the adoption of new technologies
and processes, boosting domestic firms’ productivity.(2)
Reduced openness could, therefore, restrict these
opportunities. Domestic firms may be less able to learn from
ideas and practices among foreign competitors or in foreign
firms in their supply chain. There could be less movement of
workers between foreign and domestic firms, and therefore
less acquired knowledge passed on between firms. Any such
effects on productivity could, however, be limited if firms are
able to maintain trading relationships built up over time.
A reduction in the size of the potential market available to
firms could also hamper the ability of firms to specialise,
making it more difficult for them to exploit the
United Kingdom’s areas of comparative advantage and to
achieve economies of scale. And reduced openness may lower
the degree of competition and, therefore, aggregate TFP:
many studies find that competition leads more productive
firms to expand and less productive firms to exit markets,
raising aggregate productivity.(3)
In addition, there is evidence that reductions in openness to
capital flows may make it harder for some potentially
productive investment projects to get funding and can lead to
an increase in the cost of capital, as investors’ portfolios are
less able to be diversified across a wide range of assets.(4) This
could reduce investment in the physical capital stock and lead
to a less efficient allocation of capital.
Openness may also affect the contribution of the labour force
to the supply potential of the economy. In part, the size of the
labour force will be affected by the degree of migration, the
long-term outlook for which is uncertain. That, in turn, will
depend on a number of factors such as UK government policy
in light of the referendum. In addition to the size of the labour
force, the degree of labour flexibility can affect how efficiently
firms can match vacancies with those workers that have the
desired skills.
Finally, the composition of demand for UK output may be
affected by changes in the trading arrangements between the
United Kingdom and its economic partners, necessitating a
reallocation of resources. If such a shift were to take place
from sectors with a high level of productivity to sectors with a
low level of productivity, or require retraining of workers or
investment in new capital, that would exert a drag on
aggregate productivity growth for as long as that shift occurs.
Overall, there are a number of channels through which a less
open trading arrangement with the European Union may lead
to some reduction in the long-run level of potential output in
the United Kingdom. The extent of any such drag, however,
will depend on the precise arrangements that are eventually
put in place. Those arrangements, and any effects on
potential supply that result, are likely to take some time to
become clear. There is also substantial uncertainty over how
companies will react in anticipation of any changes in trading
arrangements (Section 5).
(1) See, for example, Feyrer, J (2009), ‘Distance, trade, and income — the 1967 to 1975
closing of the Suez Canal as a natural experiment’, Trade and income: exploiting time
series in geography, and Kehoe, T J and Ruhl, K (2007), ‘Recent great depressions:
aggregate growth in New Zealand and Switzerland’, in Kehoe, T J and Prescott, E C
(eds), Great Depressions of the Twentieth Century, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
pages 335–72. For a detailed discussion of the empirical literature on productivity and
dynamism in the UK economy, see Section 2 of ‘EU membership and the Bank of
England’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/euboe211015.pdf.
(2) See Haskel, J E, Pereira, S C and Slaughter, M J (2007), ‘Does inward foreign direct
investment boost the productivity of domestic firms?’, The Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 89(3), pages 482–96, and the discussion on page 37 of ‘EU membership
and the Bank of England’, ibid, which showed that a high proportion of firms in the
United Kingdom reported that FDI brought new technology into the country.
(3) See, for instance, Bloom, N, Draca, M and Van Reenen, J (2011), ‘Trade induced
technical change? The impact of Chinese imports on innovation, IT and productivity’,
NBER Working Paper No. 16717.
(4) See Forbes, K J (2007), ‘The microeconomic evidence on capital controls: no free
lunch’, in Edwards, S (ed), Capital controls and capital flows in emerging economies:
policies, practices and consequences, University of Chicago Press.
30 Inflation Report August 2016
Table 4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in May Developments now anticipated
Household energy prices Revised up
• Domestic gas prices to fall by just over
10% in 2016 H2.
• Domestic electricity prices to remain
flat.
• Domestic gas and electricity prices are
unchanged in 2016.
Commodity prices Higher than expected
• Commodity prices to evolve in line with
the conditioning assumptions.
• US dollar oil prices are around 1½%
higher.
Import prices Revised up significantly
• Non-fuel import prices to rise by almost
1% in the year to 2016 Q4.
• Non-fuel import prices expected to rise
by 6% in the year to 2017 Q1, on account
of recent falls in sterling.
Earnings growth Revised down slightly
• Four-quarter AWE growth to pick up to
3% by the end of the year.
• Four-quarter AWE growth around 2¾%
at the turn of the year.
Unit labour costs Revised down slightly
• Four-quarter growth in whole-economy
unit labour costs to average 2½% in
2016 H2.
• Weak productivity growth means that
four-quarter growth in whole-economy
unit labour costs reaches 2¼% by the
turn of the year.
Inflation expectations Broadly unchanged
• Indicators of inflation expectations
continue to be broadly consistent with
the 2% target.
• Household and financial market
measures of near-term inflation
expectations have increased a little,
while longer-term measures have fallen
modestly. On balance, measures are
broadly consistent with the 2% target.
The rise in uncertainty and financial market moves associated with the vote in June to leave the
European Union are likely to have contrasting implications for external and domestic cost pressures.
The fall in the sterling ERI is projected to push up imported costs significantly. In contrast, the
outlook for domestic cost growth is a little weaker, as a projected widening in the margin of spare
capacity weighs on wage growth and companies’ pricing decisions. Overall, the near-term inflation
outlook is higher than in the May Report.
4.1 Consumer price developments and the
near-term outlook
CPI inflation was 0.5% in June (Chart 4.1). As inflation
remains more than 1 percentage point below the 2% target,
the Governor has written a seventh consecutive open letter to
the Chancellor, as required by the MPC’s remit.(1) As that
letter sets out, three quarters of the deviation of inflation from
the target reflects drags from energy and food prices
(Chart 4.2), driven in part by past falls in commodity prices.
Core inflation — which excludes volatile components such as
energy and food — has also been subdued, albeit less so than
the headline measure. In part that has reflected falls in other
goods prices, due to the appreciation in sterling between 2013
and 2015 (Chart 4.3). Services inflation has also been below
its average rate, which is likely to have reflected a drag from
muted labour cost growth, along with weak imported services
price inflation.
Headline inflation in June was in line with expectations in
the May Report (Chart 4.1), although there was mixed news
across components within that. Food price inflation was a
little weaker than expected. In contrast, petrol prices were
higher than expected, reflecting rises in sterling oil prices since
the start of the year. Services inflation also picked up
by more than anticipated.
Inflation is projected to rise over the second half of 2016, as
the drag from past falls in petrol, food and other goods prices
diminishes (Chart 4.2). In addition, greater external cost
pressures have pushed up the outlook relative to May, with
inflation projected to be close to 1% in September (Chart 4.1).
The sterling ERI is around 10% lower than the conditioning
path assumed in the May Report, and around 15% below its
peak in November 2015 (Section 1). Those large falls in
4 Costs and prices
(1) The letter can be found at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/cpiletter040816.pdf.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 31
sterling will push up UK import prices, which will be passed
through to consumer prices in coming years (Section 4.2).
Further ahead, the outlook for inflation will be sensitive to the
extent to which those two countervailing forces — higher
external cost pressures and muted domestic cost pressures —
offset each other. In contrast to external pressures, the
outlook for domestic cost pressures is a little weaker than in
May. A greater degree of spare capacity within companies and
in the labour market is projected to bear down on domestic
costs and prices (Section 4.3). The outlook will also depend,
however, on developments in companies’ and households’
inflation expectations, which are currently subdued, through
their influence on wage and price-setting behaviour.
4.2 Imported cost pressures
The large fall in sterling will push up the prices of those goods
and services consumed in the United Kingdom that are
imported or produced using imported inputs. Previous
episodes of large exchange rate moves have contributed to
prolonged divergences of the inflation rate from the 2%
target. For example, the depreciation of sterling by more than
25% in 2007–08 contributed to a period of significantly
above-target inflation during 2008–13. And, as discussed in
the open letter, the appreciation in sterling in 2013–15 has
weighed on imported costs in recent years, contributing to the
current low inflation rate (Chart 4.3).
The extent to which the fall in the exchange rate passes
through to consumer prices is very uncertain and tends to vary
across components: while the prices of highly tradable goods,
such as food and petrol, tend to respond relatively quickly,
the prices of other imports tend to react over a longer period
of time.
Energy and food prices
Sterling oil prices have risen by 12% since the May Report
(Chart 4.4), reflecting the depreciation of sterling against the
US dollar following the referendum (Section 1). Dollar oil
prices are broadly unchanged, although they are around 70%
higher than earlier in the year, following sharp falls in 2014–15
(Chart 4.5).
Despite the increase in the sterling oil price since January, retail
petrol prices were around 5% lower in June than a year earlier
(Chart 4.6), and so are continuing to exert a drag on the
annual inflation rate, albeit a declining one. From September
onwards, however, petrol prices are projected to make a
positive contribution to annual headline inflation (Chart 4.2).
Sterling wholesale gas prices have risen by 14% in the past
three months, having fallen by over 50% between early 2014
and May 2016 (Chart 4.4). Changes in wholesale prices tend
to feed through to retail prices with a lag, as energy suppliers
1
0
1
2
3
4
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
2013 14 15 16
Percentage change in prices on a year earlier
Projection
CPI
–
+
Chart 4.1 CPI inflation is projected to rise further in the
near term
CPI inflation and Bank staff’s near-term projection(a)
(a) The green diamonds show Bank staff’s central projection for CPI inflation in April, May and
June 2016 at the time of the May Inflation Report. The blue diamonds show the current staff
projection for July, August and September 2016. The bands on each side of the diamonds
show the root mean squared error of the projections for CPI inflation one, two and
three months ahead made since 2004.
2
0
2
4
6
–
+
2011 12 13 14 15 16
Percentage points
Other goods(b) (35%)
Electricity and gas (4%)
Food and non-alcoholic
 beverages (10%)
Services (48%)
CPI inflation (per cent)
Fuels and lubricants (3%)
Projection(c)
Chart 4.2 The drag from food and petrol prices is likely
to continue to fade over 2016 H2
Contributions to CPI inflation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, ONS and
Bank calculations.
(a) Contributions to annual CPI inflation. Figures in parentheses are weights in the CPI basket
in 2016.
(b) Calculated as the difference between CPI inflation and the other contributions identified in
the chart.
(c) Bank staff projection. Electricity and gas prices projections assume prices stay broadly
unchanged in 2016 H2. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department for Business, Energy
and Industrial Strategy petrol price data for July 2016 and are then based on the August 2016
sterling oil futures curve shown in Chart 4.4.
32 Inflation Report August 2016
agree contracts for future wholesale gas supplies some time in
advance. While in the May Report these past falls were
projected to continue to feed through to lower retail prices in
the near term, Bank staff now anticipate no further cuts over
the next year (Table 4.A); broadly consistent with reports
from the Bank’s Agents.
Consumer food prices fell further in 2016 Q2, and are
7% lower than their peak in 2014. In part that has reflected
past sterling appreciation and lower US dollar agricultural
commodity prices, which have fallen by a further 3% since
the May Report (Chart 4.5). An intensification in competition
among food retailers is also likely to have borne down on
prices.
Set against that, the recent significant depreciation in sterling,
including by 9% against the euro since the referendum
(Section 1), is likely to push up food costs. The prices of
food-related imports are closely linked to the euro exchange
rate, due to close trade links and competition. The degree to
which these higher costs are passed through will depend on
the extent to which continued intense competition leads
retailers to absorb some of the increase in costs into their
margins.
Overall, while the fall in food prices in Q2 will weigh on annual
inflation over the next year, the drag from food prices is
projected to diminish, reflecting higher imported costs.
Non-energy import prices
In response to the recent depreciation in sterling, overall UK
non-energy import prices are projected to rise sharply over the
next year. Higher input prices will then gradually feed through
to consumer prices.
Following several years of import price falls, driven by the past
appreciation in sterling and falls in foreign currency export
prices, annual import price inflation is projected to reach 6%
in 2017 Q1, up from 1.3% in 2016 Q1 (Chart 4.7). That profile
for import prices is higher than projected in the May Report,
reflecting a path for the sterling ERI that is around 10% lower
than embodied in the May projections, which were
conditioned on a vote to remain in the European Union.(1)
As discussed in previous Reports, Bank staff estimate that, on
average, 60% of any change in sterling foreign export prices
tends to be reflected in UK import prices, with pass-through
mostly completed in a year.(2) There is significant uncertainty
around the path for import prices, however. The extent to
which foreign exporters adjust their prices will depend on the
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
2014 15 16
Agricultural prices(a)
Oil price(b)
May Report
Indices: 2014 = 100
Chart 4.5 US dollar commodity prices are broadly
unchanged since May
US dollar oil and agricultural commodity prices
Sources: Bloomberg, S&P indices, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Total agricultural and livestock S&P GSCI US dollar commodity index.
(b) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2007 09 11 13 15 17
Pence per therm £ per barrel
Oil(a) (right-hand scale)
August 2016 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
May 2016 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
Gas(b)
 (left-hand scale)
Chart 4.4 Sterling oil and gas prices have risen since May
Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time converted into sterling.
(b) One-day forward price of UK natural gas.
(c) Averages during the fifteen working days to 27 July 2016 and 4 May 2016 respectively.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2006 09 12 15
Per cent
Sustained sterling appreciation(b)
Sustained sterling depreciation(b)
Core inflation
Chart 4.3 Large sterling moves have typically been
associated with large moves in core inflation
Core inflation(a)
(a) CPI inflation excluding energy, food, tobacco, alcohol and non-alcoholic beverages. Adjusted
by Bank staff for changes in the rate of VAT, although there is uncertainty around the precise
impact of those changes.
(b) The periods shown are July 2007 to March 2009; March 2013 to August 2015; and
November 2015 to June 2016. Based on a move of at least 15% in the sterling ERI between
the local minima and maxima.
(1) For a discussion of the treatment of asset prices in the May projections, see the box
on page 40 of the May 2016 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/may.pdf.
(2) For further discussion see the box on pages 28–29 of the November 2015 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/nov.pdf. 
 Section 4 Costs and prices 33
factors driving the change in the exchange rate and the
demand backdrop: for example, a weaker domestic demand
environment could lead to reduced pass-through to higher
import prices as companies exporting to the United Kingdom
seek to maintain their market share.(1) It is also possible that
the relatively large scale of the recent move in the exchange
rate prompts exporters to pass through more of the
depreciation than they would on average.
Developments in non-energy import prices are passed through
the supply chain to consumer prices, generally with a lag, as
domestic companies adjust their margins and prices. The
degree of pass-through to consumer prices is uncertain and
will depend on factors such as the import content of
consumption and how domestic economic conditions affect
businesses’ pricing decisions. In addition, the speed of
pass-through may be influenced by the extent to which
companies have entered into forward contracts to hedge
against exchange rate movements.
As discussed in the November 2015 Report, Bank staff
estimate that, on average, all of the change in import prices
tends to be reflected in the CPI, with most of that
pass-through occurring over three years. There is so far little
evidence to suggest that the recent depreciation will be passed
through differently: according to the Bank’s Agents, for
example, there was little reported change in hedging activity
in the run-up to the referendum, suggesting that the speed of
pass-through to consumer prices will be similar to that seen in
previous episodes. Having dragged on CPI inflation in recent
years, import prices are now projected to push up inflation
from the autumn.
4.3 Domestic cost pressures
In addition to imported cost pressures, the outlook for
inflation will also be determined by the evolution of domestic
costs. Domestically generated inflation (DGI) is not directly
observable, but a range of indicators suggest that DGI is
currently some way below its historical average rate
(Chart 4.8).
The impact of falls in sterling on inflation, and the projected
weakness in demand, will have countervailing effects on
domestic cost pressures. On the one hand, the associated
widening in the margin of spare capacity (Section 3) is likely to
weigh on costs and prices. On the other hand, a period of
rising import prices could lead companies to seek to restore
their profit margins and households to seek higher wages,
which would place upward pressure on consumer prices.
40
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50 Percentage change on a year earlier £ per barrel
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Sterling oil prices(a)
 (right-hand scale)
CPI fuels and lubricants
 prices (left-hand scale)
Projection(b)
+
–
+
–
Chart 4.6 Petrol prices are likely to push up annual
CPI inflation later this year
Sterling oil prices and CPI fuels prices
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy,
ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Monthly averages of the oil price and the futures curve. The oil price is the Brent forward
price for delivery in 10–25 days’ time, converted into sterling. The futures curve is the
average during the fifteen working days to 27 July 2016.
(b) Bank staff projections of the fuels and lubricants component of CPI inflation use Department
for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy petrol price data for July 2016 and are then
based on the August 2016 sterling oil futures curve.
+
–
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Foreign export prices
in sterling terms(b)
UK import price deflator(c)
Foreign export prices in
 foreign currency(d)
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Chart 4.7 Import prices rose in Q1
UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel(a)
Sources: Bank of England, CEIC, Eurostat, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) The diamonds show Bank staff’s projections for 2016 Q2.
(b) Domestic currency non-oil export prices as defined in footnote (d), divided by the sterling
effective exchange rate.
(c) UK goods and services import deflator excluding fuels and the impact of MTIC fraud. The
ONS has identified an error in the data for April and May 2016. Bank staff’s projection
looks through these data.
(d) Domestic currency non-oil export prices of goods and services of 51 countries weighted
according to their shares in UK imports. The sample does not include any major oil
exporters.
(1) For further discussion of the factors affecting exchange rate pass-through see
Forbes, K, Hjortsoe, I and Nenova, T (2015), ‘The shocks matter: improving our
estimates of exchange rate pass-through’, External MPC Unit Discussion Paper No. 43;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/externalmpc/
extmpcpaper0043.pdf.
34 Inflation Report August 2016
Developments in inflation expectations could also influence
these price and wage-setting decisions.
Companies’ margins
Having fallen during the financial crisis, companies’ margins
have recovered in recent years (Chart 4.9). In the near term,
margins are likely to be squeezed as the rise in imported price
pressures pushes up companies’ input costs. Over time,
companies are likely to seek to restore their margins by
pushing down domestic costs, such as wages, or by passing
higher import costs on to consumers in the form of higher
prices.
The way in which companies respond to higher import costs is
likely to be influenced by the demand outlook. The projected
slowing in demand growth is likely to be associated with
greater spare capacity (Section 3), which is likely to weigh on
domestic costs, such as wage growth. That will reduce
somewhat the extent to which companies seek to restore their
margins by increasing their output prices.
Wages and labour costs
Companies’ wage bills tend to account for the majority of
their domestic cost of producing output. In particular, the
average labour cost of producing a unit of output — the unit
labour cost — is likely to be a significant driver of pricing
pressure.
Wage growth has been weak since the financial crisis. That
has predominantly reflected subdued productivity growth.
Elevated unemployment is also likely to have played a role,
although that effect will have diminished as unemployment
has fallen back (Section 3). In addition, some contacts of the
Bank’s Agents report that the low level of inflation has
recently weighed on nominal wage growth: the boost to real
wages (Chart 4.10) and associated increase in households’
purchasing power has reduced some of the pressure on
companies to increase nominal pay growth.
Whole-economy average weekly earnings (AWE) increased by
2.3% in the three months to May, compared with the same
period a year ago (Table 4.B). Although growth remains
below its pre-crisis average, it was somewhat stronger than
had been projected in the May Report. Shorter-term measures
have pointed to some further momentum in pay growth:
annualised whole-economy regular pay growth, which
excludes bonuses, is estimated to have risen by 3% in the
three months to May, compared with the previous three
months.
While that momentum will continue to influence the annual
rate of wage growth in the near term, the weaker outlook for
demand (Section 2) is likely to be associated with an easing in
capacity pressures within companies and greater slack in the
labour market (Section 3), which are likely to reduce pay
12
14
16
18
20
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Per cent
0
Chart 4.9 Companies’ profit margins have recovered
in recent years
Private non-financial corporate profit share (excluding the oil
sector)(a)
(a) Gross trading profits of PNFCs (excluding continental shelf companies) less the alignment
adjustment divided by nominal gross value added at factor cost.
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Real pay(a)
CPI
+
–
Chart 4.10 Real wage growth has been supported by
subdued inflation
Real pay and consumer prices
(a) Whole-economy average weekly earnings excluding arrears of pay, deflated by CPI. The last
observation is May 2016.
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Average of DGI measures
Range of DGI measures(a) –
+
Chart 4.8 Measures of DGI remain subdued
Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI)
(a) Includes: whole-economy unit labour costs (as defined in footnote (a) of Chart 4.11);
private sector AWE total pay divided by private sector productivity, based on the backcast of
the final estimate of GDP; the GDP deflator; the GVA deflator excluding government; and
the services producer prices index.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 35
Table 4.B Wage growth has picked up in recent years but still
remains below average
Indicators of annual wage growth
Per cent
Averages 2016
2002–07 2010–12 2014 2015 Q1 Q2
(1) Total AWE(a) 4.2 2.0 1.2 2.4 2.0 2.3
(2) AWE regular pay(a)(b) 3.9 1.8 1.3 2.4 2.2 2.2
(1)–(2) Bonus contribution(a)(c) 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.0 -0.2 0.1
Pay settlements(d) 3.2 1.7 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.2
Survey indicators of wage growth
CBI(e) n.a. 1.6 2.0 2.3 2.3 2.1
REC(f) 56.7 52.4 63.1 61.9 58.9 58.0
Agents(g) 2.4 1.3 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0
CIPD(h) n.a. 1.2 2.0 1.8 1.7 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD),
Incomes Data Services, KPMG/REC/Markit, the Labour Research Department, ONS, XpertHR and
Bank calculations.
(a) Figures for 2016 Q2 are data for the three months to May.
(b) Whole-economy total pay excluding bonuses and arrears of pay.
(c) Percentage points. The bonus contribution does not always equal the difference between total AWE growth
and AWE regular pay growth due to rounding.
(d) Average over the past twelve months, based on monthly data.
(e) Measures of expected wages for the year ahead. Produced by weighting together balances for
manufacturing, distributive trades, business/consumer/professional services and financial services using
employee job shares.
(f) Produced by weighting together survey indices for the pay of permanent and temporary placements using
employee job shares; quarterly averages. A reading above 50 indicates growth on the previous month and
those below 50 indicate a decrease.
(g) End-quarter observation for manufacturing and services weighted together using employee job shares. The
scores refer to companies’ labour costs over the past three months compared with the same period a year
earlier. Scores of -5 to 5 represent rapidly falling and rapidly rising respectively, with zero representing no
change.
(h) Pay increase intentions excluding bonuses over the coming year. Data only available since 2012.
pressures over time. There could be some upward pressure on
wages from higher costs of imported goods and services, if
employees seek greater pay rises to maintain growth in their
purchasing power, and if households’ inflation expectations
rise beyond past averages. Currently, however, measures of
households’ inflation expectations remain subdued relative
to average.
The National Living Wage, which came into effect in April, is
likely to have a limited effect on overall wage growth. The
impact may be greater for sectors with a large share of
employees receiving the minimum wage, such as hospitality
and retail. Reports from the Bank’s Agents, however, suggest
that companies are seeking to limit the impact on overall
costs, for example by reducing other aspects of pay, such as
overtime payments, or by investing to increase productivity.
The impact of wage pressures on companies’ costs will depend
on how wages evolve relative to productivity — unit labour
cost growth. Whole-economy unit labour costs, based on
National Accounts data, rose by 1.5% in the year to Q1
(Chart 4.11). That was much stronger than the 0.7% expected
in the May Report, on account of a pickup in non-wage costs,
which tend to be volatile from quarter to quarter.
Overall, the outlook for four-quarter wage growth over the
rest of the year is a little weaker than in May (Table 4.A),
and it is projected to remain subdued in 2017 (Section 5).
While productivity growth is likely to slow in the second
half of the year (Section 3), that is likely to feed through to
wage growth more gradually. Reflecting the more sluggish
adjustment in wage growth, companies’ unit labour cost
growth is projected to rise over the next year, before falling
back in 2017 (Section 5).
Inflation expectations
Inflation expectations can influence both price and
wage-setting behaviour, which in turn determine the inflation
outlook. Measures of inflation expectations are, on average,
subdued relative to their pre-crisis averages (Table 4.C), in
part reflecting the current low inflation environment. The
MPC judges that inflation expectations are, on balance, well
anchored and are likely to rise back towards their averages as
inflation picks up. But there is a risk that inflation
expectations either remain persistently weak, or that a period
of above-target inflation, following the sharp depreciation in
sterling since the referendum, is associated with medium-term
inflation expectations rising beyond levels consistent with the
2% target.
It is too soon to judge the extent to which the referendum
outcome, and the associated depreciation in sterling, has
influenced households’ inflation expectations as most survey
measures available at the time of publication predate the
referendum. Those measures that cover the period after the
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage points
Productivity
Non-wage labour costs per head
Wages, salaries and self-employment
income per head(b)
Unit labour cost growth (per cent)
–
+
Chart 4.11 Unit labour cost growth rose in Q1 and is
likely to have been broadly stable in Q2
Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy unit labour cost
growth(a)
(a) Whole-economy labour costs divided by GDP, based on the backcast of the final estimate of
GDP. The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2016 Q2.
(b) Self-employment income is calculated from mixed income, assuming that the share of
employment income in that is the same as the share of employee compensation in nominal
GDP less mixed income.
36 Inflation Report August 2016
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Below 1.5% 1.5%–2.5% Above 2.5%
Percentages of respondents
2015 Q4
2016 Q1
2016 Q2
Chart 4.12 The proportion of companies expecting
inflation to exceed the target in two years’ time rose
in Q2
Deloitte CFO Survey: distribution of two year ahead CPI inflation
expectations(a)
Source: Deloitte.
(a) The question asks respondents what they think CPI inflation will be in two years’ time.
Responses on the boundary of the range are included in the lower range, for example an
inflation expectation of 1.5% is in the ‘Below 1.5%’ range. Data are non seasonally adjusted.
referendum suggest that shorter-term indicators have
picked up, probably reflecting the expected impact of the fall
in sterling. For example, according to the GfK/EC survey of
households, the proportion of respondents expecting inflation
to rise at a more rapid pace over the next year, compared with
the past year, increased to 34% in July, from 12% in June. One
year ahead expectations, according to the YouGov/Citigroup
survey, picked up a little in July (Table 4.C). In contrast,
expectations of inflation in five to ten years’ time fell.
Companies’ expectations of inflation two years ahead have
also risen. According to the Deloitte survey of chief financial
officers of large companies, the proportion of respondents
expecting inflation to exceed 2.5% in two years time rose to a
third in the survey taken after the referendum, from close to
zero in the previous survey (Chart 4.12). In addition, the
proportion of companies expecting inflation to be below 1.5%
fell sharply, although only to around the same share of
companies expecting inflation to be above 2.5%. Professional
forecasters’ expectations of inflation in three years’ time were
little changed on the quarter (Table 4.C).
Measures of inflation compensation in financial markets are an
indicator of financial market participants’ inflation
expectations. Shorter-term inflation compensation measures
have picked up a little since the referendum, consistent with
an expectation that the depreciation in sterling will push up
inflation in the near term. In contrast, inflation compensation
five to ten years ahead fell a little in July (Table 4.C), as have
longer-term compensation measures, such as those ten to
twenty years ahead.
The MPC judges that inflation expectations remain well
anchored, and it will continue to monitor further developments
in inflation expectations closely as inflation continues to rise.
Table 4.C Indicators of inflation expectations(a)
Per cent 2000 (or start Averages 2013 2014 2015 2016
of series) to 2007 since
averages(b) 2008 Q1 Q2 Q3(c)
One year ahead inflation expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK/TNS(e) 2.4 3.1 3.5 2.7 2.0 1.8 2.0 n.a.
Barclays Basix(f) 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.3 1.5 n.a. 1.7 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 2.5 2.4 2.7 2.0 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.8
Companies (2008 Q2)(g) n.a. 0.5 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.5 n.a.
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(h) 2.6 2.7 3.0 2.8 2.5 2.4 2.6 3.0
Two to three year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK/TNS (2009 Q1)(e) n.a. 2.8 3.3 2.7 2.3 2.1 2.2 n.a.
Barclays Basix(f) 3.2 3.1 3.2 2.6 1.9 n.a. 2.2 n.a.
Professional forecasters
(2006 Q2)(i) 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.1 2.1
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(j) 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.0 2.8 2.9 3.0
Five to ten year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK/TNS (2009 Q1)(e) n.a. 3.2 3.6 3.1 2.8 2.9 3.4 n.a.
Barclays Basix (2008 Q3)(f) n.a. 3.7 3.8 3.6 3.1 n.a. 3.6 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 3.5 3.2 3.5 2.9 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.4
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(k) 3.0 3.4 3.5 3.4 3.3 3.2 3.1 3.0
Memo: CPI inflation 1.6 2.4 2.6 1.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Bloomberg, CBI (all rights reserved), Citigroup, GfK, ONS, TNS,
YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Dates in parentheses indicate start date of the data series.
(c) Financial markets data are averages from 1 July to 27 July 2016. YouGov/Citigroup data are for July.
(d) The household surveys ask about expected changes in prices but do not reference a specific price index, and
the measures are based on the median estimated price change.
(e) In 2016 Q1, the survey provider changed from GfK to TNS.
(f) No data available for 2016 Q1.
(g) CBI data for the manufacturing, business/consumer services and distribution sectors, weighted together
using nominal shares in value added. Companies are asked about the expected percentage price change
over the coming twelve months in the markets in which they compete.
(h) Instantaneous RPI inflation one year ahead implied from swaps.
(i) Bank’s survey of external forecasters, inflation rate three years ahead.
(j) Instantaneous RPI inflation three years ahead implied from swaps.
(k) Five-year, five-year forward RPI inflation implied from swaps.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 37
5 Prospects for inflation
The vote to leave the European Union is likely to have significant implications for the UK economic
outlook. It will take some time for those implications to become clear and the projections in this
Report assume that uncertainty around the United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements weighs
on the outlook for both demand and supply. There are already signs of a weaker outlook: some
uncertainty indicators have risen further; property markets appear to be weakening; and survey
indicators of activity have fallen. The sterling exchange rate has also fallen sharply. That will, by
itself, provide support to exporters, but it will also raise import prices, weighing on households’ real
incomes and pushing up inflation. Overall, growth is projected to slow markedly in coming
quarters, opening up a margin of spare capacity. The transition to new trading arrangements with
the European Union, and companies’ uncertainty about the impact of those, could weigh on
productivity growth in coming years. Supply growth is judged likely to remain below past averages
throughout the forecast period. That means a pickup in GDP growth to modest rates in the second
half of the forecast period begins to close the margin of slack. There are counterbalancing forces on
inflation throughout the forecast period, with a boost from higher import prices and a drag from
the larger margin of spare capacity. The exchange rate effect will, however, fade over time. In light
of the outlook for activity and inflation, the MPC has announced a package of policy stimulus
measures to support the UK economy.
The MPC has assessed the likely implications of the vote to
leave the European Union for demand, supply and inflation in
light of the evidence available to date. The outlook for the
UK economy has changed markedly since May. It now seems
likely that demand growth will weaken significantly over
coming quarters and that the path for supply growth will be
below that assumed three months ago. Despite those
downward revisions to supply, demand is projected to be
sufficiently weak to raise unemployment and economic slack,
constraining wage growth and putting downward pressure on
domestic inflation. As a consequence, the MPC now faces a
policy trade-off as the upward impetus from the fall in sterling
is likely to push inflation somewhat above the 2% target in the
second half of the forecast period. Under its remit, the MPC
aims to support demand to reduce the variability of output,
and by extension employment, and so ensure that the return
of inflation to the target is sustainable. If a margin of slack
were to remain once the temporary boost from higher import
prices fades, inflation would subsequently be likely to fall back
below the target. At its meeting ending 3 August, the MPC
voted for a package of measures designed to provide
additional support to growth and to achieve a sustainable
return of inflation to the target. This package comprises: a
25 basis point cut in Bank Rate to 0.25%; a new Term Funding
Scheme to reinforce the pass-through of the cut in Bank Rate;
38 Inflation Report August 2016
the purchase of up to £10 billion of UK corporate bonds; and
an expansion of the asset purchase scheme for UK government
bonds of £60 billion, taking the total stock of these asset
purchases to £435 billion. The last three elements will be
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves. That
package is set out in more detail in a box on pages iii–viii. The
factors behind that decision are set out in the Monetary Policy
Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail in the
Minutes of the meeting.(1) The remainder of this section sets
out the MPC’s projections, as summarised in Table 5.A, and
the risks around them, in more detail.
5.1 The MPC’s central projection, key
judgements and risks
The vote to leave the European Union has significant
implications for the UK economic outlook. The eventual
trading arrangements with its economic partners will depend
on the outcome of negotiations with many countries. It will
be some time before those arrangements, and their impact on
the UK economy, become clear. There are significant
uncertainties around the nature of those trading arrangements
and the MPC has not assumed they take any particular form
over the long run. Instead, the projections in this Report are
conditioned on the average of a range of possible outcomes.
As such, firms are assumed gradually to anticipate, and to
adapt to, a somewhat less open trading environment for a
number of years.
That uncertainty has been reflected in sharp rises in indicators
of uncertainty in recent months. Greater uncertainty could
weigh on spending and particularly on major spending
commitments that are large, costly to reverse or have returns
that accrue over time. This is likely, for example, to be one
element behind the growing signs of weakness in property
markets.
Asset markets have also been volatile in the wake of the
referendum result. Most notably, sterling has fallen further,
leaving it 15% below its November peak, and around 10%
below the path assumed in the May projection.(2) Equity
prices fell in the days after 23 June, but have tended to recover
subsequently. That recovery has been most marked for those
companies operating in international markets who benefit
from the lower exchange rate. Equity prices for domestically
focused companies are 9% below their pre-referendum levels.
Banks’ equity prices have fallen by around 9% since 23 June,
with domestically focused banks’ prices down 24%. Bank debt
funding costs have, however, been relatively stable, suggesting
that any concerns about future profitability have not been
compounded by concerns about resilience. Banks in the
United Kingdom have strengthened their balance sheets over
(1) The Minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2016/aug.pdf.
(2) The May projection assumed the sterling ERI exchange rate was around 89.
ONS data
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased gilts financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves reaches £435 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period;
that the stock of purchased corporate bonds financed by the issuance of central bank reserves
reaches £10 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period; and on the announced
Term Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central bank reserves. To the left of the
vertical dashed line, the distribution reflects the likelihood of revisions to the data over the past;
to the right, it reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If economic
circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective
judgement is that the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within the darkest central band
on only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to
lie within each pair of the lighter green areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the
forecast period, GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of
100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP growth can fall anywhere
outside the green area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the
light grey background. See the box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a
fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
Chart 5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations, other policy actions as announced
Table 5.A Forecast summary(a)
Projections
 2016 2017 2018
GDP(b) 2.0 (2.0) 0.8 (2.3) 1.8 (2.3)
Excluding backcast 1.8 (1.9) 0.8 (2.3) 1.8 (2.3)
 2016 Q3 2017 Q3 2018 Q3 2019 Q3
CPI inflation(c) 0.8 (0.8) 1.9 (1.5) 2.4 (2.1) 2.4
LFS unemployment rate 5.0 (5.1) 5.4 (4.9) 5.6 (4.9) 5.3
Bank Rate(d) 0.3 (0.4) 0.1 (0.5) 0.1 (0.6) 0.2
(a) Modal projections for GDP, CPI inflation and LFS unemployment. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the May 2016 Inflation Report. Projections were only available to 2019 Q2 in
May.
(b) Calendar-year growth in real GDP consistent with the modal projection for four-quarter growth in real GDP.
The MPC’s projections are based on its backcast for GDP.
(c) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(d) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on
overnight index swap rates.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 39
recent years such that the financial system has become
significantly more resilient. Consistent with that, there have
been few signs of a tightening in bank credit supply.
Yield curves have fallen in the United Kingdom and other
advanced economies (Section 1). That probably in part
reflects revisions to expectations for monetary policy in a
range of countries but also increased demand for assets that
are perceived as relatively safe. In the United Kingdom, in the
run-up to the August Report market interest rates implied a
cut in Bank Rate of 25 basis points in August, and further
reductions by early 2017 (Table 5.B). The projections
described in this section are conditioned on that path for
Bank Rate and the policy package announced on 4 August.(1)
There are limited data as yet for the post-referendum period.
Survey data that are available, together with evidence from
the Bank’s Agents, suggest a slowing in activity growth and
that some companies are beginning to adjust their investment
and employment plans. For example, the Markit/CIPS survey
of the private non-distribution sector, which typically provides
one of the better signals about activity, would by itself suggest
a contraction in output in Q3 (Section 2). Survey indicators
have, however, sometimes overreacted to unexpected events.
The Lloyds measure of business confidence, which recovered
much of its post-referendum fall in its subsequent release,
Table 5.B Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates(a)
Per cent
 2016 2017 2018 2019
 Q3(b)
 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
August 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
May 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8
(a) The data are fifteen working day averages of one-day forward rates to 27 July 2016 and 4 May 2016
respectively. The curve is based on overnight index swap rates.
(b) August figure for 2016 Q3 is an average of realised overnight rates to 27 July 2016, and forward rates
thereafter.
(1) Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on:
Bank Rate following a path implied by market yields; the introduction of the Term
Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central bank reserves; the stock of
purchased gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaching
£435 billion and remaining there throughout the forecast period; the stock of
purchased corporate bonds financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaching
£10 billion and remaining there throughout the forecast period; the
Recommendations of the Financial Policy Committee and the current regulatory
plans of the Prudential Regulation Authority; the Government’s tax and spending
plans as set out in the March 2016 Budget; commodity prices following market paths;
and the sterling exchange rate remains broadly flat. The main assumptions are set
out in a table at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
inflationreport/2016/augca.pdf.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest
rate expectations, other policy actions as announced
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.3 CPI inflation projection in May based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased gilts
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 depict the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. Chart 5.2 has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased gilts financed by the issuance of central bank
reserves reaches £435 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period; that the stock of purchased corporate bonds financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaches £10 billion and remains there throughout
the forecast period; and on the announced Term Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central bank reserves. Chart 5.3 has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased gilts financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation
in any particular quarter would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan charts are constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter red areas on
30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall
anywhere outside the red area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the light grey background. See the box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan
chart and what it represents.
40 Inflation Report August 2016
points to a more gradual slowing. On balance, these
indicators suggest little growth in the second half of 2016
(Chart 5.1). There is a range of views among Committee
members on the near-term outlook, with risks on both sides of
that path. On balance, however, the risks to the near-term
central projection are judged to lie to the downside.
Relative to the time of the May Report a number of factors are
likely to weigh on activity. The outlook for activity will
depend on: how companies react to a period of heightened
uncertainty; the extent to which they begin to adjust their
output, investment and workforces in anticipation of any
changes in trading arrangements; how asset markets,
including property markets, react; and the net impact of
looser monetary policy and greater uncertainty on households’
saving. Even absent any increase in precautionary saving,
household spending will be affected by the squeeze in real
incomes following the fall in sterling and any weakening in
employment growth.
Uncertainty around the MPC’s growth projection (Chart 5.1) is
greater than usual. Overall, the MPC judges it likely that
annual private domestic demand growth will slow over the
coming year before recovering gradually further out, a weaker
path than assumed in May. Business investment is projected
to fall by around 5% in the second half of 2016 and to rise at a
slower rate than expected in the May Report thereafter
(Table 5.C). Businesses are projected to reduce employment
growth such that unemployment rises to around 5½%
(Chart 5.4). Housing investment is projected to fall, and
house prices to decline a little over the next year (Table 5.D)
before picking up in line with earnings further out.
Households’ real income is likely to be broadly flat over the
next year as higher import prices offset modest rises in wages
and salaries, and it is likely to grow only modestly further out
given the weak prospects for supply growth. Reflecting that,
consumption growth is projected to slow gradually over the
next twelve months, before picking up again from 2018
(Table 5.C). The household saving ratio is projected to remain
around its current level. The risks around the private domestic
demand projection are set out in Key Judgement 1.
Net trade is projected to support growth over the forecast
period, a stronger profile than in May. Growth in the rest of
the world is projected to remain modest, with only limited
spillovers from the UK referendum to other economies. Given
relative demand weakness in the United Kingdom and the
lower level of sterling, exports are judged likely to rise relative
to imports over the forecast period, although both are weaker
than in May (Table 5.C). The risks around those assumptions,
and other influences on the UK current account, are set out in
Key Judgement 3.
While the outlooks for demand and supply are closely linked,
it is the extent to which demand weakens relative to supply
that will determine inflationary pressure in the medium term
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Unemployment rate, per cent
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased gilts financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves reaches £435 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period;
that the stock of purchased corporate bonds financed by the issuance of central bank reserves
reaches £10 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period; and on the announced
Term Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central bank reserves. The coloured
bands have the same interpretation as in Chart 5.2, and portray 90% of the probability
distribution. The calibration of this fan chart takes account of the likely path dependency of the
economy, where, for example, it is judged that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will
continue to have some effect on unemployment in successive quarters. The fan begins in
2016 Q2, a quarter earlier than the fan for CPI inflation. That is because Q2 is a staff projection
for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for April and May. The unemployment rate
was 4.9% in the three months to May, and is projected to be 4.9% in Q2 as a whole. A
significant proportion of this distribution lies below Bank staff’s current estimate of the
long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. There is therefore uncertainty about the precise
calibration of this fan chart.
Chart 5.4 Unemployment projection based on market
interest rate expectations, other policy actions as announced
Table 5.C Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections(a)
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
Household consumption(b) 3½ 2½ (2½) 1 (2½) ¾ (2¼)
Business investment(c) 2½ -3¾ (2½) -2 (7¼) 4¾ (7¾)
Housing investment(d) 3¾ 1¼ (4) -4¾ (5¼) 2½ (4¾)
Exports(e) 4½ 2¾ (1½) -½ (1¼) ¼ (1¾)
Imports(e) 6 1¼ (3) -2½ (2¼) -1¼ (2½)
Real post-tax household income(f) 3 2 (1½) ½ (1¾) 1¼ (2)
Employment(g) 1 ½ (¾) 0 (¾) ¾ (¾)
Average weekly earnings(h) 4¼ 2¾ (3) 3 (3¾) 3½ (4)
(a) These projections are produced by Bank staff for the MPC to be consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment. Figures show calendar-year growth rates
unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the May 2016
Inflation Report.
(b) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Chained-volume measure.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending
on services associated with the sale and purchase of property.
(e) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC)
fraud.
(f) Total available household resources deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(g) Four-quarter growth rate in Q4.
(h) Four-quarter growth in Q4 in whole-economy total pay. 
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 41
and is therefore more relevant for monetary policy. The
weakness in demand will, in itself, weigh on supply growth to
some degree: in particular, the period of low investment will
reduce growth in the capital stock and thus labour
productivity. There could also be more direct implications for
supply from the transition to new trading arrangements with
the European Union as large-scale capital reallocations are
usually associated initially with weaker productivity (see the
box on page 29). Companies’ uncertainty about the impact of
those arrangements could also weigh on productivity growth.
The MPC’s central judgement is therefore that supply growth
is likely to remain well below average rates throughout the
forecast period. Overall, however, demand falls relative to
supply so that unemployment and slack are projected to
increase over the next year or so before falling back
somewhat. Key Judgement 2 sets out the risks around supply.
The Committee’s projections are underpinned by four key
judgements. Risks surround all of these, and the MPC will
monitor a broad range of variables to understand the degree
to which the risks are crystallising. The table below shows
Bank staff’s indicative near-term projections that are
consistent with the judgements in the MPC’s central view
evolving as expected.
Table 5.D Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements
Key judgement Likely developments in 2016 Q3 to 2017 Q1 if judgements evolve as expected
1: a period of heightened
uncertainty and weakness in
property markets weighs on
private domestic demand
• Business investment is projected to fall by around 1¾% a quarter, on average, reflecting the impact of
post-referendum uncertainty.
• A slowing in real income growth leads quarterly consumption growth to slow gradually to around ¼% in
2017 Q1.
• Credit spreads to increase slightly.
• Mortgage approvals for house purchase to be 56,000 a month, on average.
• Quarterly growth in housing investment to average -1%.
• The average of the Halifax and Nationwide price indices is expected to decline a little over the next year.
2: potential supply growth
remains well below past
average rates
• Quarterly growth in hourly productivity of around ¼%.
• Participation rate to remain around 63½%.
• Average hours to fall by ¾% in the year to 2017 Q1.
• Unemployment starts to rise from its current trough, reaching just over 5% by 2017 Q1.
3: the fall in sterling leads to
a narrowing in the current
account deficit against a
backdrop of modest global
demand growth
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average around ¼%.
• Annual euro-area HICP inflation to increase in the coming months as past falls in oil prices drop out of
the annual calculation.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a little above ½%.
• Annual US PCE inflation to pick up in coming months, averaging a little below 1½%.
• Indicators of activity consistent with four-quarter PPP-weighted emerging market economy growth of
around 4¼%; within that, Chinese GDP growth to average around 6½%.
• Net trade contributes positively to real GDP growth.
• The current account deficit narrows to around 5% by early 2017.
4: domestic cost pressures
remain soft but higher import
prices take inflation back to
the 2% target then somewhat
above it
• Weak productivity growth means that four-quarter growth in whole-economy unit labour costs reaches
2¼% by the turn of the year.
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to evolve in line with the conditioning assumptions set out in
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/augca.pdf.
• Domestic gas and electricity prices are unchanged in 2016.
• Four-quarter AWE growth remains around 2¾% at the turn of the year.
• Non-fuel import prices to rise by 6% in the year to 2017 Q1.
• Indicators of inflation expectations continue to be broadly consistent with the 2% target.
42 Inflation Report August 2016
Although domestic inflationary pressures are likely to remain
weak over the forecast period, those are more than offset by
upward pressure from external factors. The impact of past
falls in food and energy prices will fall out of the annual
inflation rate over coming months. More notably, the 15% fall
in sterling since November 2015 by itself suggests close to a
10% rise in import prices over the next year or so. For some
items, such as food and petrol, changes in import costs tend to
feed through quickly to retail prices. For other items,
pass-through tends to be more drawn out. In the central
projection, the contribution of non-energy import prices adds
around 0.6 percentage points to annual inflation in the second
and third years of the forecast period, with that contribution
likely to fall back in the subsequent year. The MPC’s best
collective judgement is that, conditional on the market path
for interest rates and its package of additional stimulus
measures, inflation is likely to return to the 2% target in late
2017 and then rise somewhat above it temporarily (Chart 5.2).
The risks around that profile are set out in Key Judgement 4.
Key Judgement 1: a period of heightened uncertainty and
weakness in property markets weighs on private domestic
demand
The MPC judges it likely that private domestic demand growth
will slow over the coming year, driven by declining housing
and business investment and a slowdown in consumption
growth. Private domestic demand growth recovers gradually
further out as the drag from uncertainty fades and the
substantial easing in monetary policy gains traction.
Uncertainty has risen sharply. For example, a measure based
on indicators such as media references, surveys and the
dispersion of forecasts (Section 2) has picked up since
December 2015 and is now two standard deviations above its
25-year average, with economists’ forecasts unusually
dispersed. That elevated uncertainty reduces companies’
appetite for investment and deters households from making
some major purchases. In the central projection uncertainty
remains elevated for the next few quarters before falling back
slowly. There are risks around that path. A purely mechanical
mapping, holding all else equal, suggests that a one standard
deviation lower (or higher) path for uncertainty would be
associated with four-quarter GDP growth over the following
year or so being just over ½ percentage point higher (or
lower). In practice, the overall changes in the MPC’s
projections would also depend on the precise cause of the
change in uncertainty.
One way in which a rise in uncertainty is likely to influence
activity is through other variables such as asset prices. It
seems likely that the signs of slowing in the housing and
commercial real estate markets set out below in part reflect
the recent rise in uncertainty. Given those interlinkages, an
update of the MPC’s forecasts that took account of both the
observed increases in uncertainty and developments in
property markets would risk double counting to some degree
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 43
their overall impact. The MPC has therefore slightly reduced
the combined effect of these two channels a little to take
account of those common drivers. If they had not made that
change, the central projection for GDP growth would be
around ½ percentage point lower over the first year of the
forecast period. There are risks on both sides of that
adjustment to the profile.
Commercial real estate activity fell significantly ahead of the
referendum and prospects appear to have weakened further
since. That weighs a little on activity directly. It will also
weigh indirectly as weakness in transactions feeds through to
investment in new buildings, and projected falls in prices
reduce the collateral available for businesses to borrow
against. The impact of each of these channels is relatively
small in the central projection, but there is considerable
uncertainty about the extent of the slowdown in this market.
The outlook for the housing market has been revised down
markedly since the May Report. Some of that reflects a
reassessment of prospects for housing transactions in the
medium term, unconnected to developments since the
referendum (Section 2). Most, however, reflects more recent
signs of weakness including the RICS survey of chartered
surveyors, which pointed to sharp falls in expectations of
activity and prices immediately after the referendum.
Heightened uncertainty around, or downward revisions to,
expectations for income are likely to lead some prospective
homebuyers to put off purchases. That affects activity
directly, as will related falls in construction activity as
house builders put projects on hold. Those factors also affect
the outlook for house prices, which has been revised down.
That is likely to weigh on consumption growth; it lowers the
value of collateral available to borrowers and some
homeowners may reduce spending if the value of their
property falls.
Another key influence on household spending will be income
growth. Real income growth had been picking up in recent
years as nominal incomes continued to grow and the price of
oil and other imported goods fell. Both those trends appear
likely to reverse over the next year reflecting a sharp rise in
import prices and slower supply growth. Household
consumption growth is projected to slow gradually, broadly in
line with income (Table 5.C). In other words, the central
projection incorporates a broadly flat path for saving
(Chart 5.5), with factors that tend to raise saving such as
increased uncertainty balanced by monetary stimulus. It is
possible that households will want to increase saving for
precautionary reasons if, for example, they become more
concerned about job loss or lower income growth in the
future. Alternatively, households may be slower to adjust to a
lower path for income, and so could reduce saving for a period
in order to maintain spending growth. There is a range of
views on the Committee about the outlook for saving and
hence consumption.
0
5
10
15
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Saving ratio available at the time of the May Report
Latest ONS estimate of the saving ratio Per cent
Projection at the time of the May Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in August
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources.
Chart 5.5 Household saving ratio(a)
44 Inflation Report August 2016
In the central projection, uncertainty weighs on business
investment in the near term. Further out, some companies
may reinstate delayed projects, supported by the falls in their
borrowing costs and improved demand prospects associated
with the MPC’s stimulus package and, for some exporters, the
lower exchange rate. Others are likely to scale back
investment plans in the light of the weaker supply outlook, but
could do that more slowly or more quickly than assumed.
Key Judgement 2: potential supply growth remains well
below past average rates
A feature of the years following the financial crisis has been
the weakness in potential productivity and supply growth
more generally. In previous projections, potential productivity
growth was projected to be rising gradually towards average
rates, reflecting, for example, improved functioning of the
financial system. In the August projection, however, potential
productivity growth remains subdued. Weakness in supply
limits the extent to which lower demand translates into higher
unemployment and greater spare capacity: in the central
projection the unemployment rate reaches 5½% and slack
widens to just over 1% of GDP, despite the 2½% downward
revision to cumulative GDP growth over the forecast period
since the May Report. There are risks around those
assumptions stemming from the responses of companies and
households to demand prospects and their assessment of, and
uncertainty about, the United Kingdom’s future capacity
needs.
Weakness in demand will, in itself, weigh on supply growth: in
particular, the period of low investment will reduce growth in
the capital stock and productivity. There could also be more
direct implications for supply from the vote to leave the
European Union (Section 3). First, whatever new
arrangements are agreed upon may be anticipated to result in
reduced openness overall, at least for a period. This is likely to
have some negative effect on potential supply growth.
Second, if companies are uncertain about the implications of
those new arrangements for their future operating models,
including staffing, that could weigh on investment,
productivity and supply growth. For example, if UK companies
delay entering new markets or foreign firms put off planned
investment into the United Kingdom. Businesses may also
postpone some research projects which would otherwise have
improved their productivity over the forecast period. Third, a
desire to reorient business models may require a reallocation
of resources towards new sectors or markets, including
possibly some reduction in specialisation in sectors in which
the United Kingdom has previously had a particular
comparative advantage: that may also weigh on productivity
growth for a period. Overall, while the implications for
productivity of the transition to new trading arrangements
with the European Union are highly uncertain, the MPC’s
central judgement is that productivity growth is likely to be
below past average rates throughout the forecast period. As
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 45
always, the MPC has made no judgement about supply
prospects beyond its forecast horizon.
There is also uncertainty about prospects for labour supply. In
the central projection, as in May, population grows in line with
ONS projections, which embody a fall back in net migration.
The paths for participation and average hours are both broadly
unrevised since May (Table 5.E). It is possible that labour
supply reacts more to the squeeze in real income: following
the financial crisis, the number of people reporting they
wanted to work more hours rose as real take-home pay fell.
The subdued path for supply growth means that the demand
slowdown is associated with a relatively modest rise in
unemployment back to rates last seen in 2015.
Unemployment falls back as demand growth recovers. There
is considerable uncertainty around that path.
Key Judgement 3: the fall in sterling leads to a narrowing in
the current account deficit against a backdrop of modest
global demand growth
The UK current account deficit was at a historic high at nearly
7% of GDP at the start of 2016. That reflected deficits on
both trade and income flows, in part due to the relatively
strong performance of the United Kingdom compared with its
major trading partners in recent years. The current account
deficit is now projected to halve over the forecast period. That
in part reflects the less favourable demand conditions in the
United Kingdom relative to those abroad, which are likely to
be associated with a rebalancing of trade and income flows. It
also reflects support from the sharp fall in sterling, which
bolsters exports and discourages imports and also boosts the
sterling value of inflows of profits from abroad. The lower
level of sterling also improves the UK net international
investment position. Estimates suggest that around 60% of
the stock of external liabilities is denominated in foreign
currency, compared with more than 90% of the stock of
external assets (Section 2). The outlook for trade and the
current account will depend crucially on how UK companies
and their trading partners and domestic and foreign investors
react to the vote to leave the European Union and the lower
level of sterling, with a risk that exports are weaker or imports
stronger than assumed.
UK prospects also depend on developments in the rest of the
world. There has been little material news regarding the major
advanced or emerging economies since the May Report. And
the MPC’s projections assume limited spillovers from the
UK vote to leave the European Union on other countries.
Overall, therefore, global GDP grows at below average rates,
just a little weaker than projected in May (Table 5.E). The
risks to that projection remain to the downside.
Of these spillovers, the most significant are to the euro area.
The lower level of sterling and slower growth in UK demand
weigh on euro-area exports. The resultant drag is only partly
Table 5.E MPC key judgements(a)(b)
Key Judgement 1: a period of heightened uncertainty and weakness in property
markets weighs on private domestic demand
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
Credit spreads(c) ¾(d) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2)
Household saving ratio(e) 8 5¾ (3½) 5 (2¾) 5½ (2½)
Business investment to GDP ratio(f) 9½ 9 (9¾) 8¾ (10¼) 9¼ (10¾)
Key Judgement 2: potential supply growth remains well below past average rates
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
Productivity(g) 2¼ ¾ (1¼) 1¼ (1¾) 1½ (1¾)
Participation rate(h) 63 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½)
Average hours(i) 32¼ 32 (32) 32 (31¾) 31¾ (31¾)
Key Judgement 3: the fall in sterling leads to a narrowing in the current account
deficit against a backdrop of modest global demand growth
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
World GDP (UK-weighted)(j) 3 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2½) 2¼ (2½)
World GDP (PPP-weighted)(k) 4 3¼ (3) 3¼ (3½) 3½ (3½)
Euro-area GDP(l) 2¼ 1½ (1¾) 1¼ (1¾) 1¾ (1¾)
US GDP(m) 3 2 (1¾) 2¼ (2¼) 2 (2)
Dollar oil prices(n) 39 47 (46) 52 (49) 55 (51)
Key Judgement 4: domestic cost pressures remain soft but higher import prices take
inflation back to the 2% target then somewhat above it
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
UK import prices(o) ¼ 7 (1) 2¼ (¾) 1¾ (¾)
Unit labour costs(p) 3 2¼ (2¾) 2 (2¼) 2¼ (2½)
Sources: Bank of England, BDRC Continental SME Finance Monitor, Bloomberg, BofA Merrill Lynch Global
Research (used with permission), British Household Panel Survey, Department for Business, Energy and
Industrial Strategy, Eurostat, IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and
Bank calculations.
(a) The MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts)
are underpinned by four key judgements. The mapping from the key judgements to individual variables is
not precise, but the profiles in the table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s key
judgements.
(b) Figures show calendar-year growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the May 2016 Inflation Report. Calculations for back data based on ONS data
are shown using ONS series identifiers.
(c) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(d) Based on the weighted average of spreads for households and large companies over 2003 and 2004
relative to the level in 2007 Q3. Data used to construct the SME spread are not available for that period.
The period is chosen as broadly representative of one where spreads were neither unusually tight nor
unusually loose.
(e) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources. As shown in Chart 5.5, the
starting point for the saving ratio is higher than at the time of the May Report.
(f) Calendar-year average. Chained-volume business investment as a percentage of GDP.
(g) GDP per hour worked. GDP at market prices is based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast.
(h) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population.
(i) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job.
(j) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 180 countries weighted according
to their shares in UK exports.
(k) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 181 countries weighted according
to their shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(l) Chained-volume measure.
(m) Chained-volume measure.
(n) Average level in Q4. Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices.
(o) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4.
(p) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at
market prices, based on the mode of the MPC's GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation
of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
46 Inflation Report August 2016
offset by the greater stimulus implied by a lower yield curve,
falls in which may in part reflect an expectation by market
participants of further easing by the European Central Bank.
Overall, euro-area growth is therefore judged likely to be a
little weaker than projected in May (Chart 5.6).
Long-standing financial vulnerabilities within the euro area
remain: for example, falls in bank equity prices have reflected
increased concerns about banks in some periphery countries.
Further afield, spillovers are likely to be less marked. In the
United States, although activity has been a little weaker than
expected over the past three months, consumption growth
has picked up and continued labour market normalisation is
expected to support strengthening domestic demand growth.
Although lower prospects for UK growth are assumed to weigh
a little on US exports, that effect is largely offset by the
greater stimulus implied by a lower yield curve, leaving the
outlook for US GDP broadly unchanged (Table 5.E).
That fall in the US yield curve provides some support to
emerging market economies (EMEs) as well. There remains a
risk, however, that a more pronounced tightening in US policy
rates than embodied in market prices could trigger renewed
capital outflows from EMEs, particularly given sharp rises in
debt levels in a number of countries, including China, in recent
years. In the central projection, GDP growth in China is
broadly similar to the path assumed in May, slowing to around
6% a year, but that is likely to be associated with further
growth in credit and risks remain to the downside. Growth in
other EMEs is assumed to recover a little following weakness
in 2015 but, as in May, it remains well below past average
rates.
Key Judgement 4: domestic cost pressures remain soft but
higher import prices take inflation back to the 2% target
then somewhat above it
CPI inflation has been close to zero for the past 18 months,
largely reflecting a drag from food, energy and other imported
goods prices but also weak domestic pressures (Section 4).
The fall in the value of sterling, together with a pickup in oil
prices means that the contribution from external prices is
likely to turn positive by early 2017. In contrast, domestic
price pressures seem likely to remain soft, given a growing
margin of slack over the first half of the forecast period. On
balance, the MPC judges it likely that CPI inflation will pick up
sharply over the next six months. It is likely to remain close to
the 2% target until early 2018 and, conditioned on market
interest rates and the MPC’s policy stimulus, rise temporarily
above it thereafter. Risks to that outlook stem from the
degree and pace of exchange rate pass-through, and on the
extent of the drag from domestic pressures.
The 15% fall in the sterling exchange rate since
November 2015 will, over time, be reflected in higher
consumer prices. Evidence from similar moves in the past
Projection at the time of the May Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in August
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
Percentage change on previous year
+
–
Sources: Eurostat and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. Chained-volume measure.
Chart 5.6 Euro-area GDP(a)
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Percentage change on previous year
Projection at the time of the May Report
Projection consistent with MPC
 key judgements in August
+
–
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Projections are four-quarter inflation rate in Q4. Excludes the impact of MTIC fraud.
Chart 5.7 Import price inflation(a)
Table 5.F Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths(a)
 Mode Median Mean
2016(b) 2.0 (2.0) 2.0 (2.0) 1.9 (2.0)
2017 0.8 (2.3) 0.8 (2.2) 0.7 (2.2)
2018 1.8 (2.3) 1.7 (2.2) 1.7 (2.2)
(a) The table shows the projections for calendar-year growth of real GDP consistent with the modal, median
and mean projections for four-quarter growth of real GDP implied by the fan chart. Where growth rates
depend in part on the MPC’s backcast, revisions to quarterly growth are assumed to be independent of the
revisions to previous quarters. The figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the
May 2016 Inflation Report. The August projections have been conditioned on the assumption that the stock
of purchased gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaches £435 billion and remains there
throughout the forecast period; that the stock of purchased corporate bonds financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves reaches £10 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period; and on the
announced Term Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central bank reserves. The May
projections have been conditioned on market interest rates, and the assumption that the stock of purchased
gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast
period.
(b) The anticipated revisions to recent estimates of quarterly GDP growth have implications for calendar-year
growth in 2016. Without the anticipated revisions to past GDP growth, the modal path of the Committee’s
August projections would imply calendar-year growth of 1.8% in 2016 rather than 2.0%. 
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 47
suggests that the fall is unlikely to be fully reflected in
UK import prices — some exporters to the United Kingdom may
absorb the change in sterling by lowering other costs or
accepting lower profits. The fall in sterling is assumed to raise
import prices by around 10% by mid-2017 (Chart 5.7). For
some items, such as food and petrol, changes in import costs
feed through quickly to retail prices. For other items,
pass-through is more drawn out. In the central projection,
non-energy import prices are projected to still be contributing
0.6 percentage points to CPI inflation in three years’ time.
Given the scale of the fall in sterling, it is possible that
pass-through will be faster, implying an upside risk to the central
projection in the near term and a downside risk further out.
Domestic pricing pressures are likely to remain weak.
Companies that are facing a weaker demand outlook and an
associated increase in their spare capacity are likely to try to
bear down on their costs, including labour costs, or accept a
period of lower profit margins in an attempt to attract
customers. Wages adjust slowly to the weaker path for
productivity growth, but unit labour costs grow at
below-average rates throughout the forecast period (Table 5.E).
Overall, pay growth is projected to remain subdued in coming
years, with average earnings growth lower than the path in the
May Report (Table 5.C).
There are downside risks to that outlook stemming from the
possibility of a weaker path for demand and therefore a higher
path for unemployment. Upside risks stem from households’
and companies’ reaction to the rise in import prices. Higher
costs for imported goods and services will, by themselves,
reduce real wages. There is a risk that employees will try to
resist that reduction by bidding for higher nominal wages. That
risk is greater should inflation expectations begin to rise beyond
levels consistent with the 2% target, increasing companies’
willingness to raise wages more quickly and raise their prices in
response. In that circumstance it could prove more costly for
the MPC to bring inflation back to the 2% target. The past
decade has, however, seen sustained periods of both above and
below-target inflation, and, although indicators of inflation
expectations have responded modestly to those developments,
there have been only limited signs of any material impact on
wage and price-setting decisions. Moreover, despite rises in
indicators of near-term inflation expectations following the fall
in sterling, financial market and available household indicators
further ahead have fallen slightly (Section 4). The MPC will
continue to monitor inflation expectations closely.
5.2 The projections for demand,
unemployment and inflation
Based on these judgements and the risks around them, and
under the path for Bank Rate based on market yields and the
MPC’s package of additional stimulus measures, four-quarter
GDP growth is projected to slow markedly in the near term
2.0 1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
August
May
0
1
2
3
4 Probability density, per cent(b)
– +
(a) Chart 5.8 represents the cross-section of the GDP growth fan chart in 2018 Q3 for the market
interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased
gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaches £435 billion and remains there
throughout the forecast period; that the stock of purchased corporate bonds financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves reaches £10 billion and remains there throughout the forecast
period; and on the announced Term Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central
bank reserves. The coloured bands in Chart 5.8 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan
charts. Like the fan charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey
outline represents the corresponding cross-section of the May 2016 Inflation Report fan chart,
which was conditioned on market interest rates and the assumption that the stock of purchased
gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the
forecast period.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of growth
being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given growth rate, specified to one decimal place.
Chart 5.8 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in
2018 Q3 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
Table 5.G Q4 CPI inflation
 Mode Median Mean
2016 Q4 1.2 (0.9) 1.3 (0.9) 1.3 (0.9)
2017 Q4 2.0 (1.8) 2.0 (1.8) 2.1 (1.8)
2018 Q4 2.4 (2.2) 2.4 (2.2) 2.4 (2.2)
The table shows projections for Q4 four-quarter CPI inflation. The figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the May 2016 Inflation Report. The August projections have been conditioned on
the assumption that the stock of purchased gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaches
£435 billion and remains there throughout the forecast period; that the stock of purchased corporate bonds
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaches £10 billion and remains there throughout the forecast
period; and on the announced Term Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
The May projections have been conditioned on market interest rates, and the assumption that the stock of
purchased gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the
forecast period.
0
1
2
3
4
1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
Probability density, per cent(b)
August
May
– +
(a) Chart 5.9 represents the cross-section of the CPI inflation fan chart in 2018 Q3 for the market
interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased
gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves reaches £435 billion and remains there
throughout the forecast period; that the stock of purchased corporate bonds financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves reaches £10 billion and remains there throughout the forecast
period; and on the announced Term Funding Scheme (TFS) financed by the issuance of central
bank reserves. The coloured bands in Chart 5.9 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan
charts. Like the fan charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey
outline represents the corresponding cross-section of the May 2016 Inflation Report fan chart,
which was conditioned on market interest rates and the assumption that the stock of purchased
gilts financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the
forecast period.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of inflation
being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given inflation rate, specified to one decimal place.
Chart 5.9 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in
2018 Q3 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
48 Inflation Report August 2016
before rising to around 2¼% further out. That is a lower
growth projection than in the May Report, which was
conditioned on a continuation of EU membership, for much of
the forecast period (Table 5.F) but similar by the end. Greater
uncertainty and lower supply prospects following the vote to
leave the European Union weigh on private domestic demand
growth, although the depreciation in sterling supports net
trade. Consistent with heightened uncertainty, the MPC has
widened its growth fan chart (Chart 5.8). And, despite the
lower central path for growth than three months ago, it judges
that risks remain to the downside, largely stemming from the
possibility that net trade will provide less support than
assumed. There is a range of views on the Committee about
the outlook for demand and the risks around it.
Demand growth weakens relative to supply, such that
unemployment is projected to rise and a margin of spare
capacity opens up. Conditioned on market interest rates and
the MPC’s package of additional stimulus measures, by the
end of the forecast period the unemployment rate is projected
to fall back to 5¼% (Chart 5.4). Unemployment is higher
than the path in the May Report throughout the forecast
period. There remain considerable risks around that
projection, but to the extent that risks to demand and supply
are closely related, the risks around the unemployment profile
have not increased markedly since May.
The margin of spare capacity bears down on CPI inflation
throughout the forecast period. Acting against that, however,
is the substantial upward pressure from the depreciation of
sterling since late 2015. In the central projection, past falls in
energy and food prices drop out of the annual comparison and
external price pressures build such that inflation rises sharply
over the next six months (Table 5.G). Those external
pressures push inflation above the target in the second half of
the forecast period (Chart 5.9). It is possible that
pass-through of higher import prices will be more rapid, such
that the risks to inflation are to the upside in the near term
and to the downside further out. On balance, the MPC judges
it more likely that inflation will be above the target than
below it for the second half of the forecast period
(Chart 5.10), a higher profile than in May despite greater slack.
Charts 5.11 and 5.12 show the MPC’s projections under the
alternative constant rate assumption, and the policy package
announced by the MPC. That assumption is that Bank Rate
remains at 0.25% throughout the three years of the forecast
period, before rising towards the market path over the
subsequent three years. Under that path, the outlooks for
GDP growth and inflation are only marginally lower than
under the market path.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Q3
Probability of inflation at or below
the target, inverted (per cent)
Probability of inflation
above the target (per cent)
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
2016 17 18 19
August
May
Chart 5.10 Inflation probabilities relative to the target
The August and May swathes in this chart are derived from the same distributions as Charts 5.2
and 5.3 respectively. They indicate the assessed probability of inflation relative to the target in
each quarter of the forecast period. The 5 percentage points width of the swathes reflects the
fact that there is uncertainty about the precise probability in any given quarter, but they should
not be interpreted as confidence intervals.
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
ONS data
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
See footnote to Chart 5.1.
Chart 5.11 GDP projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.25%, other policy actions as announced
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.12 CPI inflation projection based on constant
nominal interest rates at 0.25%, other policy actions as
announced
See footnote to Chart 5.2.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 49
Other forecasters’ expectations
This box reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey
of external forecasters, carried out in July.(1) On average,
respondents expected four-quarter GDP growth to slow
substantially over the coming year, before picking up to a little
below 2% in three years’ time (Table 1). The range of
estimates for growth over the next year was at its widest for
over seven years (Chart A).
The average of respondents’ central expectation for
CPI inflation in a year’s time was 2.5%, above the MPC’s
2% target, while the average expectation in three years’ time
was 2.1%. On average, external forecasters placed a weight of
around two thirds on CPI inflation being at or above target in
two years’ time, with that weight falling to around half in
three years’ time (Chart B).
External forecasters, on average, expected a looser monetary
stance in the next three years compared with at the time of
the May Report (Chart C). The average of external forecasters’
central expectations was that Bank Rate will fall to around
0.2% by 2017 Q3 and then rise very gradually over the
subsequent two years. While the stock of asset purchases was
expected, on average, to increase to around £445 billion over
that period.
Table 1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections(a)
 2017 Q3 2018 Q3 2019 Q3
CPI inflation(b) 2.5 2.4 2.1
GDP growth(c) 0.5 1.6 1.9
LFS unemployment rate 5.7 6.0 6.0
Bank Rate (per cent) 0.2 0.3 0.5
Stock of purchased assets (£ billions)(d) 443 449 447
Sterling ERI 77.8 79.3 80.3
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 29 July 2016.
(a) For 2017 Q3, there were 22 forecasts for CPI inflation, GDP growth and Bank Rate, 20 for the unemployment
rate and the stock of asset purchases and 13 for the sterling ERI. For 2018 Q3, there were 18 forecasts for
CPI inflation and GDP growth, 19 for Bank Rate, 17 for the unemployment rate and the stock of asset
purchases and 13 for the sterling ERI. For 2019 Q3, there were 17 forecasts for CPI inflation and GDP growth,
18 for Bank Rate, 16 for the unemployment rate and the stock of asset purchases and 12 for the sterling ERI.
(b) Twelve-month rate.
(c) Four-quarter percentage change.
(d) Original purchase value. Purchased via the creation of central bank reserves.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2017 Q3 2018 Q3 2019 Q3
Interquartile range of external forecasters
Range of external forecasters
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
+
–
Chart A Most forecasters expect GDP growth to slow
over the coming year
Forecasters’ central projections of GDP growth
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 29 July 2016.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
<1.0% 1.0% to
1.5%
1.5% to
2.0%
2.0% to
2.5%
2.5% to
3.0%
>3.0%
Proportion of respondents, per cent
May Report
August Report
Chart B The weight placed on above-target inflation
two years ahead has picked up
Average probability of CPI inflation outturns in two years’ time(a)
Sources: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports in May and August 2016.
(a) Projections on the boundary of these ranges are included in the upper range, for example a
projection of inflation being 2.0% is in the 2.0% to 2.5% range.
(1) For detailed distributions of other forecasters’ expectations, see ‘Other forecasters’
expectations’ on the Bank’s website at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/inflationreport/2016/augofe.pdf.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
One year
ahead
Two years
ahead
Three years
ahead
May Report
August Report
Per cent £ billions
Central projection for stock Central projection for Bank Rate
of asset purchases
One year
ahead
Two years
ahead
Three years
ahead
Chart C Forecasters expect a looser monetary stance
compared with three months ago
Forecasters’ central projections of Bank Rate and asset purchases
Sources: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports in May and
August 2016.
50 Inflation Report August 2016
Index of charts and tables
Charts
A monetary policy package to support the UK economy iii
A Level of retail deposit rates and pass-through of lower
risk-free rates v
B Distribution of mortgage lending v
C TFS fee schedule vi
D Nominal yield curves derived from government bonds vii
E Decomposition of sterling investment-grade corporate
bond spreads vii
F Distribution of sterling-denominated investment-grade
corporate bonds viii
1 Financial markets and global economic developments 1
1.1 Sterling exchange rates 1
1.2 International forward interest rates 1
1.3 Option-implied volatility 2
1.4 Ten-year forward nominal interest rates 2
1.5 International non-financial corporate bond spreads 4
1.6 International equity prices 4
1.7 FTSE All-Share and UK domestically focused
companies’ equity prices 4
1.8 Change in equity indices for selected sectors
since 23 June 5
1.9 UK banks’ indicative longer-term funding spreads 5
1.10 Non-financial sector debt to nominal GDP ratios 8
1.11 Global composite PMI 8
The implications of falls in the yield curve for financial
conditions and stability 9
A Nominal government bond yields 9
B Bank Rate and selected household effective
interest rates 10
C Estimates of large UK banks’ net interest margins 10
D Average cost of default protection on selected
UK insurers 11
E Fifteen-year government bond yield and the balance
on UK defined-benefit pension funds as a proportion
of total liabilities 12
2 Demand and output 13
2.1 Range of uncertainty measures 13
2.2 Survey measures of investment intentions 16
2.3 UK CRE transactions 16
2.4 Mortgage approvals for house purchase and housing
transactions 17
2.5 RICS housing market indicators 17
2.6 Contributions to four-quarter private sector housing
investment growth 18
2.7 Measures of consumer confidence and unemployment
expectations 18
2.8 Household consumption and house prices 19
2.9 Household deposit and lending interest rates 19
2.10 UK current account 21
2.11 Contributions to average quarterly GVA growth by
sector 21
2.12 Survey indicators of output growth and expected
output growth 22
2.13 Output growth and Bank staff’s near-term projection 22
Agents’ survey on the impact on businesses of the vote to
leave the European Union 15
A Balance of survey responses for turnover and prices
by sector 15
B Balance of survey responses for capital spending and
hiring activity by sector 15
Revisions to the National Accounts 20
A GDP 20
B Revisions to household income, consumption and the
saving ratio 20
C Financial balances by sector 20
3 Supply and the labour market 23
3.1 Survey indicators of employment intentions and
reported changes in employment 23
3.2 Post-referendum surveys of the expected effect on
recruitment of the vote to leave the European Union 24
3.3 GDP growth and decomposition of growth in total
hours worked 25
3.4 Flows between employment and unemployment 25
3.5 Unemployment rate and Bank staff’s near-term
projection 26
3.6 Survey indicators of capacity utilisation 26
3.7 Agents’ scores on recruitment difficulties 27
3.8 Unemployment rates by duration 27
3.9 Part-time workers who could not find full-time work 27
3.10 Hourly labour productivity 28
4 Costs and prices 30
4.1 CPI inflation and Bank staff’s near-term projection 31
4.2 Contributions to CPI inflation 31
4.3 Core inflation 32
4.4 Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices 32
4.5 US dollar oil and agricultural commodity prices 32
4.6 Sterling oil prices and CPI fuels prices 33
4.7 UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel 33
4.8 Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI) 34
4.9 Private non-financial corporate profit share
(excluding the oil sector) 34
4.10 Real pay and consumer prices 34
4.11 Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy
unit labour cost growth 35
4.12 Deloitte CFO Survey: distribution of two year ahead
CPI inflation expectations 36
5 Prospects for inflation 37
5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations, other policy actions as announced 38
5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate
expectations, other policy actions as announced 39
5.3 CPI inflation projection in May based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased
gilts 39
5.4 Unemployment projection based on market interest
rate expectations, other policy actions as announced 40
5.5 Household saving ratio 43
5.6 Euro-area GDP 46
5.7 Import price inflation 46
 Index of charts and tables 51
5.8 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in 2018 Q3
(central 90% of the distribution) 47
5.9 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in 2018 Q3
(central 90% of the distribution) 47
5.10 Inflation probabilities relative to the target 48
5.11 GDP projection based on constant nominal interest
rates at 0.25%, other policy actions as announced 48
5.12 CPI inflation projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.25%, other policy actions as
announced 48
Other forecasters’ expectations 49
A Forecasters’ central projections of GDP growth 49
B Average probability of CPI inflation outturns in
two years’ time 49
C Forecasters’ central projections of Bank Rate and
asset purchases 49
Tables
A monetary policy package to support the UK economy iii
1 Stock of gilts available for purchase vii
1 Financial markets and global economic developments 1
1.A GDP in selected countries and regions 6
1.B Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 6
1.C Inflation in selected countries and regions 7
The implications of falls in the yield curve for financial
conditions and stability 9
1 Proportion of the stock of UK-resident MFIs’ lending
and deposits at fixed and floating rate in 2016 Q1 10
2 Demand and output 13
2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 14
2.B Expenditure components of demand 14
2.C Net external finance raised by private non-financial
corporations 16
Agents’ survey on the impact on businesses of the vote to
leave the European Union 15
1 Survey responses on the impact of the vote to leave
the EU on business 15
3 Supply and the labour market 23
3.A Change in employment, and vacancies 24
3.B Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 28
4 Costs and prices 30
4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 30
4.B Indicators of annual wage growth 35
4.C Indicators of inflation expectations 36
5 Prospects for inflation 37
5.A Forecast summary 38
5.B Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates 39
5.C Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections 40
5.D Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements 41
5.E MPC key judgements 45
5.F Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths 46
5.G Q4 CPI inflation 47
Other forecasters’ expectations 49
1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections 49
52 Inflation Report August 2016
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CDS – credit default swap.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices
index.
DGI – domestically generated inflation.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
RPI – retail prices index.
RPI inflation – inflation measured by the retail prices index.
SVR – standard variable rate.
Abbreviations
APF – Asset Purchase Facility.
BCC – British Chambers of Commerce.
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CBPS – Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme.
CEIC – CEIC Data Company Ltd.
CFO – chief financial officer.
CIPD – Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development.
CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
CRE – commercial real estate.
CSPP – corporate sector purchase programme.
EC – European Commission.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EME – emerging market economy.
EU – European Union.
FDI – foreign direct investment.
FLS – Funding for Lending Scheme.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FPC – Financial Policy Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
GVA – gross value added.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
MFIs – monetary financial institutions.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MSCI – Morgan Stanley Capital International Inc.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
PNFCs – private non-financial corporations.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
PRA – Prudential Regulation Authority.
PwC – PricewaterhouseCoopers.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
RICS – Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SMEs – small and medium-sized enterprises.
TFP – total factor productivity.
TFS – Term Funding Scheme.
TLTRO – targeted longer-term refinancing operation.
VAT – Value Added Tax.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Symbols and conventions
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in
charts and tables is the Bank of England or the Office for
National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from financial
markets data, are seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may
sometimes differ from the total shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first
observation within the relevant period, eg data for the first
quarter of the year.
Glossary and other information

© Bank of England 2016
ISSN 1353-6737
Printed by Park Communications Limited