Inflation Report
November 2015

BANK OF ENGLAND
Inflation Report
November 2015
In order to maintain price stability, the Government has set the Bank’s Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) a target for the annual inflation rate of the Consumer Prices Index of 2%.
Subject to that, the MPC is also required to support the Government’s economic policy,
including its objectives for growth and employment.
The Inflation Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of
the Monetary Policy Committee. It serves two purposes. First, its preparation provides a
comprehensive and forward-looking framework for discussion among MPC members as an aid
to our decision-making. Second, its publication allows us to share our thinking and explain the
reasons for our decisions to those whom they affect.
Although not every member will agree with every assumption on which our projections are
based, the fan charts represent the MPC’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths
for inflation, output and unemployment, as well as the uncertainties surrounding those central
projections.
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998.
The Monetary Policy Committee:
Mark Carney, Governor
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy
Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability
Nemat Shafik, Deputy Governor responsible for markets and banking
Kristin Forbes
Andrew Haldane
Ian McCafferty
Gertjan Vlieghe
Martin Weale
The Inflation Report is available in PDF alongside PowerPoint™ versions of the charts and
Excel spreadsheets of the data underlying most of them at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/2015/nov.aspx.

 Monetary Policy Summary i
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.1 Global economic developments 1
1.2 Asset prices and monetary policy 5
Box How would a slowdown in China affect the UK economy? 2
Box Monetary policy since the August Report 9
2 Demand and output 10
2.1 Output and GDP 10
2.2 Domestic demand 11
2.3 External demand and UK net trade 16
Box Revisions to the National Accounts 13
Box Household balance sheets 15
3 Supply and the labour market 18
3.1 Labour market developments and slack 18
3.2 Productivity 21
3.3 Wages 22
4 Costs and prices 24
4.1 Consumer price developments and the near-term outlook 24
4.2 Imported price pressures 25
4.3 Domestic cost pressures 26
4.4 Inflation expectations 27
Box The effect of imported price pressures on UK consumer prices 28
5 Prospects for inflation 30
5.1 Key judgements and risks 32
5.2 The projections for demand, unemployment and inflation 39
Box The MPC’s asset purchases as Bank Rate rises 34
Box Other forecasters’ expectations 41
Box How has the economy evolved relative to the August 2014 Report? 42
Box The Monetary Policy Committee’s response to the Independent Evaluation Office
 evaluation of the MPC’s forecasting performance 44
Index of charts and tables 47
Glossary and other information 49
Contents

 Monetary Policy Summary i
Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy in order to
meet the 2% inflation target and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At
its meeting ending on 4 November 2015, the MPC voted by a majority of 8–1 to maintain
Bank Rate at 0.5%. The Committee voted unanimously to maintain the stock of purchased
assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves at £375 billion, and so to reinvest the
£6.3 billion of cash flows associated with the redemption of the December 2015 gilt held in
the Asset Purchase Facility.
In September, twelve-month CPI inflation stood at -0.1%, slightly over 2 percentage points below the inflation target.
Around four fifths of the deviation from the target reflects falls in energy, food and other imported goods prices, with the
remainder reflecting subdued domestic cost growth. The combined weakness in domestic costs and imported goods
prices is evident in subdued measures of core inflation, which are currently around 1%.
The outlook for inflation reflects the balance between persistent drags from factors such as sterling and world export
prices, and prospective further increases in domestic cost growth. The MPC’s objective is to return inflation to target
sustainably; that is, without an overshoot once persistent disinflationary forces ultimately wane. Given these
considerations, the MPC intends to set monetary policy to ensure that growth is sufficient to absorb remaining spare
capacity in a manner that returns inflation to the target in around two years and keeps it there in the absence of further
shocks.
The outlook for global growth has weakened since the August Inflation Report. Many emerging market economies have
slowed markedly and the Committee has downgraded its assessment of their medium-term growth prospects. While
growth in advanced economies has continued and broadened, the Committee nonetheless expects the overall pace of
UK-weighted global growth to be more modest than had been expected in August. There remain downside risks to this
outlook, including that of a more abrupt slowdown in emerging economies.
Domestic momentum remains resilient. Consumer confidence is firm, real income growth this year is expected to be the
strongest since the crisis, and investment intentions remain robust. As a result, domestic demand growth has been solid
despite the fiscal consolidation. Although it has moderated, growth is projected to pick up a little towards the middle of
next year, as a tighter labour market and stronger productivity support real incomes and consumption, and as
accommodative credit conditions encourage strong investment and a pickup in the housing market. The Committee
judges the risks to domestic demand to be broadly balanced.
Robust private domestic demand is expected to produce sufficient momentum to eliminate the margin of spare capacity
over the next year. Domestic cost pressures are expected to build as a result of a pickup in wage growth relative to
productivity growth. CPI inflation is nonetheless expected to remain below 1% until the second half of next year,
reflecting the continuing drag from commodity and other imported goods prices. Beyond that, the dampening influence
of sterling’s past appreciation on inflation is expected to be persistent, diminishing only slowly over the MPC’s forecast
period. In this context, the MPC judges it appropriate to return inflation to the target in around two years.
Reflecting concerns about the global outlook, prices of risky assets have fallen since August. There have also been sizable
declines in the yields on safe assets. These have had opposing effects in the forecast. The path for Bank Rate implied by
market yields, on which the MPC’s projections are conditioned, has fallen and now embodies an even more gradual pace
of tightening than at the time of the previous Report.
ii Inflation Report November 2015
In the Committee’s judgement, the lower path for Bank Rate implied by market yields would provide more than
adequate support to domestic demand to bring inflation to target even in the face of global weakness. In that case, the
MPC’s best collective judgement is for the most likely path for inflation to exceed slightly the 2% target in two years and
then rise a little further above it, reflecting modest excess demand. The MPC judges that the risks to this projection lie
slightly to the downside in the first two years, reflecting global factors.
Underlying those projections are significant judgements in a number of areas, as described in the November Inflation
Report. In any one of these areas, developments might easily turn out differently than assumed, with implications for the
outlook for growth and inflation, and therefore for the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Reflecting that, there is a
range of views among MPC members about the balance of risks to inflation relative to the best collective judgement
presented in the November Report. At the Committee’s meeting ending on 4 November, the majority of MPC members
judged it appropriate to leave the stance of monetary policy unchanged at present. Ian McCafferty preferred to increase
Bank Rate by 25 basis points, given his view that the path of domestic costs was more likely to lead to inflation exceeding
the target in the medium term than was embodied in the Committee’s collective November projections.
All members agree that, given the likely persistence of the headwinds weighing on the economy, when Bank Rate does
begin to rise, it is expected to do so more gradually and to a lower level than in recent cycles. This guidance is an
expectation, not a promise. The actual path Bank Rate will follow over the next few years will depend on the economic
circumstances. 
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 1
There have been sharp moves in financial markets since the
August Report. Global equity prices fell materially and
financial market volatility rose in August and September,
although these trends reversed somewhat in October
(Chart 1.1). UK short-term interest rates were lower in the
run-up to the November Report than three months ago,
although some of the falls were subsequently unwound.
These developments may reflect market participants’ views
about the prospects for, and potential downside risks to,
global growth. Since the August Report, activity in advanced
economies has been broadly on track (Table 1.A), but
emerging-economy growth has persistently disappointed over
recent years. Recent developments in China have highlighted
the challenges faced by the authorities of liberalising and
rebalancing the economy. As set out in the box on page 2, a
sharp slowing in China could affect the UK economy through a
number of channels, including through trade and financial
interlinkages.
1.1 Global economic developments
UK-weighted world GDP growth was 0.5% in 2015 Q2, slightly
weaker than expected in August, and below its average rate. It
is likely to have continued at a similar pace in Q3. The picture
across regions was mixed. Euro-area growth was broadly as
expected in Q2; in contrast, growth was weaker than
expected in a number of other economies (Table 1.A),
including Brazil and Russia. Growth in the United States
exceeded expectations in Q2, before falling back in Q3.
World GDP growth has been persistently weaker than
expected over the past few years. Much of that weakness has
been concentrated in emerging economies, where growth has
slowed more sharply than anticipated. For example, annual
emerging-economy growth since 2012 has been, on average,
¾ of a percentage point lower than International Monetary
Fund (IMF) forecasts made the previous year (Chart 1.2).
Those repeated undershoots have led the MPC to make a
downward reappraisal of the medium-term growth rate for
these economies relative to the assumption in previous
1 Global economic and financial
developments
UK-weighted world GDP rose at a slightly slower pace in 2015 Q2 than projected in the August
Report. The near-term outlook is also weaker than in August, reflecting developments in emerging
economies. In part reflecting that weaker outlook, global equity prices are lower and oil prices have
fallen by 14% since the August Report. In the United Kingdom, market prices imply a more gradual
pace of Bank Rate rises than in August. The sterling ERI is around 2% lower.
50
100
150
200
250
75
100
125
150
175
Jan. July Jan. July
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
August Report
S&P 500
 (right-hand scale)
FTSE All-Share
 (right-hand scale)
Euro Stoxx
 (right-hand scale)
MSCI Emerging Markets
 (right-hand scale)
Shanghai Composite
 (left-hand scale)
2014 15
Index: 2 January 2014 = 100
Chart 1.1 Global equity prices are lower than in the
run-up to the August Report
International equity prices(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) In local currency terms, except for MSCI Emerging Markets, which is in US dollar terms.
Table 1.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in August Developments since August
Advanced economies Broadly on track
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average
around ½%. Inflation expected to begin
to pick up towards the end of the year.
• Average quarterly US GDP growth of a
little below ¾%; non-farm payrolls to
increase by around 250,000 a month.
• GDP rose by 0.4% in Q2. Inflation was
zero in October, but is expected to pick
up in coming months.
• GDP rose by 0.4% in Q3, following
upwardly revised growth of 1% in Q2.
Non-farm payrolls rose by a monthly
average of 167,000 in Q3.
Rest of the world Emerging-economy growth weaker
• Average four-quarter PPP-weighted
emerging-economy growth of around
4¼% on average; Chinese GDP growth to
average around 6½%.
• Emerging-economy GDP growth was
4.0% in Q2. Chinese GDP growth was
6.9% in Q3.
Commodity prices and the exchange rate Oil prices much lower; sterling lower
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to
evolve in line with the conditioning
assumptions.
• US dollar oil prices are around 14%
lower. Sterling depreciated by
around 2%.
2 Inflation Report November 2015
How would a slowdown in China affect the
UK economy?
Chinese growth has slowed significantly in recent years, from
annual rates of around 10% before the crisis, to around 7%
currently. Growth is projected to continue to moderate over
the MPC’s forecast period, as demand rebalances towards
consumption, although there is significant uncertainty about
how smooth that rebalancing will be and a risk that growth
slows more sharply (Section 5). This box sets out the channels
through which a sharp slowdown in China would affect the
United Kingdom, along with some estimates of their size.
China plays a significant role in the global economy. It is now
the second largest economy, accounting for 13% of global
GDP in 2014, compared with less than 2% in 1990.(1) Over
that time, China’s trade and financial links with the rest of the
world have multiplied. China is the world’s largest goods
exporter, and Chinese demand accounts for around 10% of
global trade (Chart A). In commodity markets, China has
accounted for just over a third of oil demand growth in recent
years and the majority of demand growth for copper.
Although China’s financial system is relatively closed, its
linkages with the global financial system have increased.
China’s external liabilities accounted for 6% of world GDP in
2014, compared with an average of 3% during 2005–12.
China accounts for only 3% of UK exports so any direct effects
of a slowdown on UK output are likely to be relatively small.
But a slowing in China would also indirectly reduce UK export
demand by weighing on activity in other trading partners. For
example, China is an important source of demand for
Germany and other European countries, which account for
close to 40% of UK exports (Chart A).
As China is also an important source of demand for
commodities, a slowdown there would probably be associated
with commodity price falls. These falls would, overall, support
activity in the United Kingdom and other commodity
importers by boosting households’ real incomes.
A sharper-than-anticipated slowdown in China could also be
reflected in falls in asset prices in China and elsewhere. Such
falls may push up UK companies’ cost of capital and reduce
households’ wealth. A sharp slowing in China could also raise
uncertainty about the outlook for growth there and elsewhere,
which may weigh on UK households’ and companies’ spending
decisions. The size of these channels is likely to depend on the
scale and the nature of the slowing in China: a more severe
slowdown could have a significantly greater impact on risk
sentiment and uncertainty.
A sharp slowing in China could also have on impact on the
UK banking sector. UK-owned banks with exposures to China
could suffer losses, which in turn, might bear down on their
ability to lend to the UK real economy. They could also lead
to an increase in banks’ funding costs, particularly if combined
with a deterioration in financial market sentiment, which
would increase the cost of borrowing for UK businesses and
households. The capacity of the UK banking system to
maintain lending should these risks materialise will be
assessed as part of the Bank of England’s 2015 stress test.
Estimates based on a model of the global economy that
captures trade, financial and commodity price linkages suggest
that, if Chinese GDP were to fall by 3% relative to its trend,
UK output would be 0.3% lower as a result (Table 1).
Although that model captures China’s current importance in
world trade, other channels are based on historical
correlations. So, given the growth in China’s interlinkages with
the global economy, these estimates may understate the
impact of a slowdown in China. Indeed, in recent months
global asset prices have been noticeably sensitive to
developments in China (Section 1.2).
United Kingdom
United States
China Germany
Other
 Europe(c)
Other Asia(d)
Commodity exporters(b)
Chart A China’s trade links are significant
International trade flows(a)
Sources: IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) The size of the circle illustrates each country’s or region’s relative export share in global goods
trade. The thickness of the line indicates the size of total goods trade between countries (or
regions). Both the circles and the lines are based on nominal trade data, in US dollars, for 2014.
(b) Non-Asian commodity exporters, including Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Norway,
Peru, Saudi Arabia and South Africa.
(c) Includes Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.
(d) Includes India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.
Table 1 A slowing in China would weigh on the UK economy
Impact of a 3% fall in Chinese GDP on UK GDP(a)
 Impact on UK GDP (per cent)
Model estimate -0.3
Bottom-up estimate of channels
Trade channel -0.3
of which, direct trade -0.1
Commodity prices +0.1
Implied impact of non-trade channels -0.1
(a) Shows the estimated impact on UK GDP of an unanticipated shock that leaves Chinese GDP 3% below its
long-run trend after five years.
(1) Based on comparisons of countries’ GDP using market exchange rates. 
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 3
Reports (Section 5). While growth in advanced economies,
which account for around three quarters of UK exports, appears
to have been broadly stable since 2014, it has also persistently
disappointed expectations (Chart 1.2). Overall, UK-weighted
world GDP growth is projected to rise modestly in the near
term, but at a more gradual pace than expected in August. In
addition, recent events have highlighted the risk that growth in
emerging economies, particularly in China, could slow more
sharply than expected.
China
Chinese growth has slowed significantly in recent years
(Table 1.B). That has been associated with a moderation in
indicators of growth in industrial activity and investment; in
contrast, growth in retail sales, an indicator of household
consumption, remains robust (Chart 1.3). Such relative growth
rates are consistent with some rebalancing of demand towards
consumption and output towards the service sector. Concerns
around the outlook for demand as the economy continues to
rebalance may have been one driver of the falls in equity prices
during the summer (Chart 1.1). These concerns have also been
associated with a range of policy easing measures over the past
year. Easier policy is likely to have supported growth, with a
number of indicators pointing to relatively stable activity in
recent quarters (Chart 1.3). The official estimate of annual
GDP growth was 6.9% in 2015 Q3, similar to rates seen in the
first half of the year (Table 1.B), and broadly as anticipated in
August. Since the August Report, authorities have loosened
both monetary and fiscal policy further.
The authorities have also undertaken measures towards
financial liberalisation. In early August, the People’s Bank of
China lowered the renminbi’s central parity with the US dollar
and changed the mechanism for determining the central parity:
it is now based on the previous day’s closing exchange rate and
therefore better reflects short-term movements in demand and
supply. In late August, some measures previously introduced
to support the equity market were withdrawn. At the end of
October, the cap on customer deposit rates was removed.
These developments were associated with a rise in financial
market volatility in August and September as equity prices fell
further (Chart 1.1), and the renminbi depreciated by 3%
against the US dollar, before recovering somewhat (Chart 1.4).
That depreciation took place against a backdrop of significant
outflows of private capital, which required the authorities to
sell foreign reserves to support the exchange rate: official
reserves are reported to have fallen by around US$300 billion
— around 9% — since the start of the year.
As in August, Chinese growth is projected to continue to
moderate gently in the near term. But recent financial market
developments have highlighted the challenges faced by the
authorities in maintaining growth while both liberalising and
rebalancing the Chinese economy. As set out in the box on
page 2, a sharp slowing in China could affect the UK economy
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
2010 11 12 13 14 15
2011
2012
2013 Per cent
Dashed lines: Emerging economies
Solid lines: Advanced economies
Outturn for GDP growth
2014
2015
Chart 1.2 Emerging-economy growth has slowed by
more than expected in recent years
Outturns and IMF forecasts for calendar-year GDP growth in
emerging and advanced economies(a)
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO).
(a) Shows growth outturns and projections for advanced economies and emerging market and
developing economies, as grouped by the IMF. Each line shows how forecasts for a particular
calendar year have evolved over time. The diamond shows the eventual outturn, as
published in the October 2015 WEO.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2015 Q2
2015 Q3
2004–07 averages
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Retail
sales(b)
Car
production
Investment(b)(c)
Electricity
production
Industrial
production(b)
PMI(d)
GDP
Chart 1.3 Slowing GDP growth in China has been
associated with slowing industrial activity
Chinese activity indicators(a)
Sources: CEIC, Chinese National Bureau of Statistics, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) Annual growth in activity indicators has been scaled so that they have the same mean and
variance as annual GDP growth over the period 1998 Q2 to 2015 Q3, except for car
production, which is scaled to the period 2001 Q1 to 2015 Q3, and the PMI, which is scaled
to the period 2007 Q1 to 2015 Q3.
(b) Deflated using the consumer price index.
(c) Data are for fixed asset investment.
(d) National Bureau of Statistics headline PMI data. Manufacturing and non-manufacturing
indices are weighted together using weights in gross value added. The diamond shows the
average for 2007. 
4 Inflation Report November 2015
through a number of channels, including through trade and
financial interlinkages.
Other emerging economies
Growth across emerging economies has moderated in recent
years (Chart 1.2), and was again weaker than expected in
2015 Q2 (Table 1.A). Although GDP continued to rise solidly in
India, output contracted markedly in Brazil and Russia
(Table 1.B), and PMI indices suggest that output remained
weak in Q3 (Chart 1.5). Equity prices have also fallen in a
number of emerging economies (Section 1.2).
The recent falls in asset prices and associated rises in the cost
of capital are likely to weigh on the emerging-economy growth
outlook somewhat, compared with the August Report. Further
falls in oil prices will also weigh on activity in commodity
producers, although they are likely to support activity in
commodity-importing economies. As discussed in August,
there remains a risk that a tightening in US monetary policy
(Section 1.3) could exert an additional drag on activity in
emerging economies if it is associated with increased capital
outflows and further falls in asset prices. Furthermore, an
increase in US dollar interest rates could increase the costs of
servicing dollar-denominated debt, which has become more
prevalent in emerging economies in recent years.(1)
Euro area
After stagnating in 2012 and 2013, the euro-area economy has
begun to recover. GDP rose by 0.4% in 2015 Q2, as projected
in the August Report. Investment fell on the quarter, following
robust growth in Q1. GDP growth was supported by a pickup
in export growth and rises in household spending, which in turn
may have been boosted by falls in energy prices. Monthly
indicators, such as the PMI output surveys, point to a similar
pace of expansion in Q3, with little evidence of a drag from
uncertainty around Greek debt negotiations during the
summer. Moreover, the immediate risks in relation to Greece
have receded following the outline deal reached by the Greek
government and its euro-area creditors.
Inflation remains very low: according to the flash estimate,
HICP inflation was zero in October. That is due mostly to steep
falls in energy prices, but also reflects spare capacity: although
now on a declining path, the unemployment rate is well above
its pre-crisis average (Chart 1.6). Inflation is expected to pick
up in coming months as energy price falls begin to drop out of
the annual rate, and is likely to rise further as demand
continues to grow and the degree of slack narrows.
As in August, euro-area activity is projected to be supported by
the falls in energy prices, improved credit conditions, European
Central Bank (ECB) asset purchases and the past depreciation
in the euro (Section 5). Since the August Report, however,
financial conditions have deteriorated somewhat, reflecting
6.0
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5 Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep. Oct.
Chinese yuan to US dollar (inverted scale)
2015
Chart 1.4 The renminbi depreciated against the
US dollar in early August
Renminbi-US dollar exchange rate
Table 1.B Mixed pattern of GDP growth in Q2
GDP in selected countries and regions(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier, annualised
 Averages 2015
 1998–2007 2012–13 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3
United Kingdom 2.9 1.9 3.0 1.5 2.6 2.0
Euro area (39%) 2.3 -0.2 0.9 2.1 1.4 n.a.
United States (18%) 3.0 1.9 2.5 0.6 3.9 1.5
China (3%)(b) 10.5 7.7 7.3 7.0 7.0 6.9
Japan (2%) 1.1 1.2 -0.7 4.5 -1.2 n.a.
India (2%)(b) n.a. 5.9 7.1 7.5 7.0 n.a.
Russia (1%)(c) 7.8 1.6 -0.5 -6.1 -7.8 n.a.
Brazil (1%) 3.1 2.2 -0.3 -2.9 -7.2 n.a.
UK-weighted world GDP(d) 3.0 1.6 2.1 2.1 2.0 n.a.
Sources: IMF WEO October 2015, OECD, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Real GDP measures. Figures in parentheses are shares in UK goods and services exports in 2013 from the
2014 Pink Book.
(b) Data are four-quarter growth. The earliest observation for China is 2000 Q1 and for India is 2012 Q2.
(c) The earliest observation for Russia is 2003 Q1.
(d) Constructed using data for real GDP growth rates of 146 countries weighted according to their shares in
UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the latest observation is 2015 Q2. For those countries where
data for 2015 Q2 are not yet available, data are assumed to be consistent with projections in the IMF WEO
October 2015.
(1) For further discussion see page 14 of the July 2015 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/fsrfull1507.pdf.
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
2010 11 12 13 14 15
Indices
United States(b)(c)
Euro area
China(b)(d)
Brazil
Russia
Chart 1.5 PMIs in Russia and Brazil remained weak in Q3
Composite PMIs in selected countries(a)
Sources: Chinese National Bureau of Statistics, Markit Economics and Thomson Reuters
Datastream.
(a) Shows composite output indices unless otherwise stated. A reading of above 50 indicates
increasing output and a reading below 50 indicates decreasing output. Data are to
September 2015.
(b) Manufacturing and non-manufacturing indices are weighted together using shares in
nominal value added.
(c) Non-manufacturing indices are non seasonally adjusted.
(d) Shows the National Bureau of Statistics headline index. 
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 5
market concerns about growth prospects for emerging
economies, and the euro effective exchange rate (ERI) has
appreciated slightly (Section 1.2). These are expected to weigh
somewhat on the near-term outlook, but are likely to be partly
offset by the impact of further falls in energy prices. There is a
risk, however, that a sharper-than-anticipated slowdown in
emerging economies could weigh on euro-area activity.
United States
In the United States, GDP rose by 0.4% in 2015 Q3. That was
below the upwardly revised rate of 1% in Q2, which is likely to
have reflected an unwinding of erratic factors that had depressed
growth in Q1 (Table 1.B). Growth in Q3 was accounted for by a
solid contribution from final domestic demand. That was partly
offset by a drag from stockbuilding. Export growth weakened,
reflecting subdued external demand and the 13% rise in the
dollar over the past year.
In the near term, GDP growth is expected to remain below
pre-crisis average rates. Export growth is likely to remain weak.
In contrast, domestic demand growth is expected to remain
supported by improvements in credit conditions and the boost
to real incomes from falls in energy prices. Largely reflecting
energy price falls, annual personal consumption expenditure
inflation was only 0.2% in September.
Inflation is expected to rise in the near term, as past energy price
falls start to drop out of the annual comparison. Further out, the
pickup in inflation will rely on a more pronounced recovery in
wage growth. There has only been a small rise in wage growth
so far, despite falls in unemployment in recent years (Chart 1.6).
The unemployment rate continued to fall during Q3: at 5.1% in
September, it lies close to the Federal Open Market Committee’s
(FOMC’s) median projection of 4.9% for the longer-term
unemployment rate. But employment growth was somewhat
weaker than had been expected in August (Table 1.A).
1.2 Asset prices and monetary policy
Concerns about the prospects for growth in emerging
economies, and their potential spillovers to advanced
economies, were associated with sharp moves in financial
markets in August and September, some of which have since
unwound. Commodity and equity prices fell significantly and
measures of uncertainty rose (Chart 1.7), before recovering
somewhat in October. Short-term and long-term interest rates
in the United Kingdom have fallen since the August Report,
alongside those in the United States and the euro area.
Commodity prices
The Brent crude spot oil price has fallen by 14% since the August
Report to US$48, and is nearly 60% below its June 2014 peak
(Chart 1.8). The falls over the past year have taken place against
the backdrop of a number of supply and demand developments,
which will have borne down on prices. On the path implied by
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2000 03 06 09 12 15
Euro area
United States
Per cent
Chart 1.6 US unemployment rate close to pre-crisis
rates; euro-area rate remains elevated
Euro-area and US unemployment rates
Sources: Eurostat and US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2011 13 15
VIX(a)
MOVE(b)
Differences from averages since 2003
(number of standard deviations)
+
–
August Report
Chart 1.7 Equity price implied volatility picked up in
August before falling back
Implied volatilities for equity prices and interest rates in the
United States
Source: Bloomberg.
(a) VIX measure of 30-day implied volatility of the S&P 500 equity index.
(b) Merrill Option Volatility Estimate (MOVE) index, a yield curve weighted index of the
normalised implied volatility on one-month Treasury options.
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Indices: 2013 = 100
Agricultural prices(a)(b)
Industrial metals prices(a)
Oil price(c)
August Report
2013 14 15
Chart 1.8 Commodity prices are lower than in the
run-up to the August Report
US dollar oil and commodity prices
Sources: Bloomberg, S&P indices, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Calculated using S&P GSCI US dollar commodity price indices.
(b) Total agricultural and livestock S&P GSCI commodity index.
(c) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time.
6 Inflation Report November 2015
the futures curve, on which the MPC’s forecast is conditioned,
the oil price reaches US$62 in three years’ time.
The implications of recent falls in oil prices for UK activity will
depend on the extent to which they reflect stronger supply or
weaker demand.(1) For example, if the fall in oil prices stems
from a weakening in world, and hence oil, demand, then the
overall impact will reflect both the weaker world outlook, as
well as a boost from the lower oil price. In contrast, the
implications for UK growth of a supply-driven decline in oil
prices would be more positive. One way of ascertaining the
relative importance of demand and supply factors is to assess
comovements across a range of asset prices, which should
respond differently to oil supply and demand shocks. Estimates
using such an approach suggest around two thirds of the fall in
oil prices over the past six months can be accounted for by
demand-related factors (Chart 1.9), such as concerns about
weaker growth in countries such as China. Consistent with
those concerns, metals and agricultural commodity prices were
also lower than at the time of the August Report (Chart 1.8).
Supply factors, however, are estimated to have been a more
significant driver of the overall fall in oil prices since mid-2014
(Chart 1.9). As set out in previous Reports, supply expectations
have risen over the past year: US and OPEC production have
been greater than expected, and the anticipated lifting of the
trade embargo on Iran has boosted expected oil supply.
Corporate capital markets
Global equity prices fell significantly in August, before
recovering somewhat in October (Chart 1.1). Overall, UK and
US equity prices were around 4% and 3% lower respectively
than in the run-up to the August Report, and euro-area equity
prices were 7% lower. Equity prices in emerging economies also
fell, with a decline of 14% in China (Section 1.1), and falls of
around 7% and 3% in Brazil and India respectively. These
concurrent falls may reflect increased concerns about the global
outlook among market participants. Consistent with that,
implied volatility — a gauge of financial market uncertainty —
rose to above-average levels in August and September before
falling back in October (Chart 1.7 shows that for the
United States). Reflecting the combination of the falls in equity
prices and government interest rates, equity risk premia — the
compensation for taking equity risk demanded by investors —
are estimated to have risen in the United Kingdom,
United States and the euro area, before falling back a little in
October.
Despite recent falls, UK equity prices are little changed over the
past year (Chart 1.1). But that masks a significant divergence
between the equity prices of companies with large exposures to
countries in the Asia-Pacific region, including China, which have
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
June Aug. Oct. Dec. Feb. Apr. June Aug. Oct.
Supply
Unexplained
Demand
Oil prices
Cumulative change since peak,(b)
percentage points
2014 15
+
–
Chart 1.9 Both supply and demand factors have
weighed on oil prices over the past year
Asset price based decomposition of oil prices(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Decomposition is constructed using partial least squares analysis of movements in over
200 international asset prices.
(b) Change in US dollar Brent crude oil prices since 19 June 2014.
60
80
100
120
140
Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
Europe-focused (13%)(b)
Indices: 1 October 2014 = 100
2014 15
UK-focused (19%)(c)
US-focused (10%)(b)
Asia-Pacific-focused (11%)(e)
Other (47%)(d)
FTSE All-Share
Chart 1.10 UK-focused companies’ equity prices have
been relatively resilient
Constituents of the FTSE All-Share by geographical focus(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Companies are categorised using annual financial accounts data on their geographic revenue
breakdown. The share of market capitalisation of each category is shown in parentheses.
(b) Companies that generate 40% or more of their revenues in the United States or Europe.
(c) Companies that generate at least 70% of their revenues in the United Kingdom.
(d) Companies that have not been assigned a primary geographic revenue source.
(e) Companies that generate 30% or more of their revenues in the Asia-Pacific region.
(1) For a discussion of the impact of lower oil prices on the UK economy, see the box on
pages 32–33 of the February 2015 Report; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/inflationreport/2015/feb.pdf.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 7
fallen sharply since the spring, and those of predominantly
UK-focused companies, which have been more stable
(Chart 1.10). That could suggest that market participants’
views of the domestic outlook have remained relatively solid.
Prices of other risky assets — such as high-yield non-financial
corporate bonds — have also fallen since August and their
yields have risen. That reflects a widening in spreads — the
additional compensation that investors require for holding
risky corporate bonds instead of safer government bonds
(Chart 1.11). Some of that rise, particularly in the
United States, has been concentrated in energy sector
companies. But spreads in other sectors have also risen, which
could reflect a broader weakening in sentiment.
In the United Kingdom, the interest rates at which banks can
raise wholesale funds were little changed in the run-up to the
November Report, compared with three months earlier, and
significantly lower than levels seen in 2011–12. While
government bond and other reference rates have fallen since
August, that was offset by a small widening in the spreads
banks pay on reference rates (Chart 1.12). As noted in the Q3
Credit Conditions Review, major UK lenders attributed the
widening in spreads in recent quarters to international
developments and the associated volatility in financial
markets.
Lenders reported in the Q3 Bank Liabilities Survey that
widening funding spreads had led to increases in their transfer
prices, or the internal prices charged to business units within
each bank to fund the flow of new loans. By itself, this
increase should lead to higher interest rates on new loans to
households and companies. But competition in the banking
sector appears to have increased over the past year or so and
is likely to weigh on lending rates, partly offsetting the impact
of higher transfer prices. Overall, lending rates remain close to
historical lows (Section 2).
Monetary policy and interest rates
Short-term interest rates in the United Kingdom,
United States and euro area were lower in the run-up to the
November Report than three months earlier (Chart 1.13).
While some of those falls may reflect lower expectations of
the most likely path for policy, given the weaker outlook for
global growth and inflation, some could also reflect increased
perceptions of downside risks. Some of the falls in UK and
US rates were partly reversed at the end of October, after the
MPC’s forecast was finalised (Section 5).
In the United States, the FOMC kept the federal funds rate
unchanged. In the fifteen working days to 28 October, the
market-implied path for US interest rates reached 1.5% in
2018 Q4, compared with 2.1% at the time of the August
Report (Chart 1.13). That lower path reflected market
reaction to the FOMC’s policy statement in September, as well
as weaker-than-expected domestic data. Some of that move
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Senior unsecured
 bond spreads(a)
Five-year CDS premia(c)
Percentage points
2011 12 13 14
Spread on fixed-rate
 retail bonds(b)
15
August Report
Covered bond
 spread(d)
+
–
Chart 1.12 Some bank funding spreads have risen
slightly over the past three months
UK banks’ indicative long-term funding spreads
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Markit Group Limited and Bank calculations.
(a) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to mid-swaps for the
major UK lenders’ five-year euro senior unsecured bonds or a suitable proxy when
unavailable.
(b) Unweighted average of spreads for two-year and three-year sterling fixed-rate retail bonds
over equivalent-maturity swaps. Bond rates are end-month rates and swap rates are
monthly averages of daily rates. Bond rates data for October are flash estimates.
(c) Unweighted average of the five-year senior CDS premia for the major UK lenders.
(d) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to swaps for the major
UK lenders’ five-year euro-denominated covered bonds or a suitable proxy.
0
3
6
9
12
15
2012 13 14 15
Investment-grade (£)
High-yield (£)
High-yield (emerging markets)
High-yield (euro)
Percentage points
August Report
High-yield (US$)
Chart 1.11 Corporate bond spreads have widened
International corporate bond spreads(a)
Source: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research.
(a) Spreads on government bond yields. Investment-grade bond spreads are calculated using an
index of bonds with a rating of BBB3 or above. High-yield corporate bond spreads are
calculated using aggregate indices of bonds rated lower than BBB3. Due to monthly index
rebalancing, movements in spreads at the end of each month might reflect changes in the
population of securities within the indices.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2013 14 15 16 17 18
Per cent
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
Solid lines: November Report
Dashed lines: August Report
ECB main refinancing rate
Bank Rate
Federal funds rate(b)
+
–
Chart 1.13 Market prices imply lower interest rates in
three years’ time than they did in August
International forward interest rates(a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, ECB and Federal Reserve.
(a) The November 2015 and August 2015 curves are estimated using instantaneous forward
overnight index swap rates in the fifteen working days to 28 October and 29 July
respectively.
(b) Upper bound of the target range of 0% to 0.25%.
8 Inflation Report November 2015
was unwound following the FOMC’s October policy meeting on
28 October.
In the United Kingdom, in the fifteen working days to
28 October the market-implied path for Bank Rate reached
1.3% in 2018 Q4, compared with 1.8% at the time of the
August Report (Chart 1.13). That flattening took place against
the backdrop of rises in financial market volatility in August and
international developments. The box on page 9 discusses the
factors behind the MPC’s decisions in September and October,
while the factors underpinning the Committee’s November
decision are set out in the Monetary Policy Summary on
pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail in the minutes of
the meeting.
In the euro area, the ECB continued to undertake monthly asset
purchases of €60 billion. In September, ECB staff revised down
their projection for inflation in 2016 to 1.1%, well below the
ECB’s price stability objective of inflation below, but close to,
2%. In his statement following the October policy meeting, the
President of the ECB reiterated the Governing Council’s intent
to continue asset purchases until the end of September 2016,
or beyond, until a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
consistent with the price stability objective is seen; a cut to the
deposit facility rate was also discussed at the Governing
Council’s October meeting. Respondents to a Reuters survey in
October placed, on average, a 70% weight on the ECB’s asset
purchase programme being extended beyond September 2016.
Short-term forward interest rates have fallen (Chart 1.13),
consistent with market participants placing more weight on the
likelihood of a deposit rate cut.
The costs of government borrowing for the next ten years in
the United Kingdom, United States and the euro area were
slightly lower than in the run-up to the August Report
(Chart 1.14). That partly reflected lower near-term
expectations for policy rates, and it also reflected falls in the
implicit costs of government borrowing for five years in
five years’ time: five-year, five-year forward rates were around
0.3 percentage points lower in these economies. Some of
those falls reflected a decline in implied inflation rates, perhaps
reflecting greater market perceptions of longer-term downside
risks to inflation stemming from risks to global growth and
commodity prices.
Exchange rates
Changes in relative growth prospects, policy expectations and
risk sentiment tend to be associated with movements in
exchange rates. Emerging-economy currencies have
depreciated since the August Report. In contrast, the euro ERI
has risen by 2¼% since August (Chart 1.15). According to
market contacts, very low euro-area interest rates had
previously encouraged investors to borrow in euros to invest in
emerging-economy assets. Much of those flows reversed
following the deterioration in risk sentiment in August and
September, pushing up the euro exchange rate.
0
1
2
3
4
5
2010 11 12 13 14 15
Per cent
United States
Euro area(b)
United Kingdom
August Report
Chart 1.14 UK, US and euro-area long-term interest
rates lower than in August
International ten-year government bond yields(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon yields on ten-year benchmark government bonds.
(b) An estimate based on French and German government bonds.
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
2010 11 12 13 14 15
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
US dollar
Euro
Sterling
August Report
Chart 1.15 Euro ERI higher and dollar and sterling ERI
lower than in August
Effective exchange rates
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 9
Monetary policy since the August Report
The MPC’s central projection in the August Report, under the
assumptions that Bank Rate followed a path implied by
market interest rates and that the stock of purchased assets
remained at £375 billion, was that four-quarter GDP growth
would fall back from rates seen in 2014, and settle a little
above 2½%. Inflation was expected to remain close to zero in
the very near term, returning to the 2% target within two
years, and rising slightly above thereafter.
At the MPC’s meeting ending on 9 September, the Committee
noted that the outlook for domestic activity appeared similar
to that at the time of the August Report. While global
developments did not as yet appear sufficient to alter
materially the central outlook, the downside risks to world
activity had probably increased. In particular, concerns about
China and other emerging economies had grown, resulting in
sharp falls in the prices of risky assets. Greater downside risks
to the global environment merited close monitoring for any
impact on domestic economic activity.
Twelve-month CPI inflation had risen slightly to 0.1% in July,
and the near-term outlook for CPI inflation was little changed.
The recent slowing in employment growth alongside steady
output growth implied that productivity had risen, offsetting
the effect of higher wage growth on unit wage costs. Further
ahead, the path of inflation would depend upon the evolution
of domestic costs and on any medium-term effect of
movements in import prices.
Eight Committee members judged that the current stance of
monetary policy remained appropriate. Some members
nevertheless saw continued upside risks to inflation relative to
the target. For one member, these risks were sufficient to
justify an immediate increase in Bank Rate, given that building
domestic cost pressures would otherwise be likely to lead to
inflation overshooting the target in the medium term.
By the time of the MPC meeting ending on 6 October, GDP
growth in both the euro area and the United States in the first
half of the year had been revised up. Despite increased
concerns about growth prospects in China, Chinese activity
indicators to date had been steady. A continued slowdown in
emerging market growth remained evident, however, most
notably in Brazil and Russia. For some members, recent
developments in the global economy indicated that prospects
were somewhat weaker than had been assumed at the time of
the August Report. But for others, these developments had
only accentuated the downside risks to the outlook for
international activity in the Committee’s previous forecasts.
Domestically, data consistent with Blue Book 2015, which
were released during the month, had confirmed the recent
picture of resilient activity, with a gentle deceleration of
growth from above its historical average in 2014. Although it
was possible that that modest slowing might presage a slightly
weaker outlook than had previously been assumed, such
gentle decelerations were typical of economic cycles. The
latest data still suggested that the expansion had been
underpinned by strong private final demand.
The near-term outlook for CPI inflation had weakened slightly
on the month, in part reflecting a further decline in the oil
price. Although the exchange rate had depreciated slightly
since the August Report, its substantial appreciation since
mid-2013 continued to depress import price growth and so
CPI inflation. Wage growth had strengthened over the past
year. Productivity growth was beginning to recover,
restraining the impact of higher pay on firms’ overall costs and
therefore inflationary pressure. Although it had risen over the
past few quarters, unit labour cost growth would need to
strengthen further in order to return inflation sustainably to
the 2% target.
For eight members, the current stance of monetary policy
remained appropriate in order to meet the Committee’s aim
of returning inflation to the target within two years. For one
member, the prospective increase in domestic costs was
sufficient to justify an immediate increase in Bank Rate.
The policy decision at the meeting ending on 4 November, and
the factors behind that decision, are set out in the Monetary
Policy Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail
in the minutes of the meeting.(1)
(1) The minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2015/nov.pdf.
Against the backdrop of that strength in the euro, and broadly
consistent with relative interest rate movements, the sterling
and US dollar ERIs have depreciated by around 2% and 1¼%
respectively since the run-up to the August Report
(Chart 1.15). The broader picture of sterling appreciation,
however, remains: sterling is around 18% above its
March 2013 trough. 
2.1 Output and GDP
Quarterly output growth in the United Kingdom has fallen
back from a peak of 0.9% in 2014 Q2, to 0.5% in 2015 Q3,
according to the ONS’s preliminary estimate (Chart 2.1).
While a slowing in growth over the past year had been
projected a year ago (see the box on pages 42–43), the Q3
outturn was slightly below Bank staff’s expectations at the
time of the August Report of 0.6%. That weakness was, in
large part, due to an unexpected fall in construction output,
which subtracted 0.1 percentage points from growth
(Chart 2.2).
Early estimates of GDP are subject to revision. As explained in
the box on page 13, revisions to output since the previous
Report have done little to change the size, shape or
composition of growth over the past few years, although the
recovery in output since 2011 now appears a little stronger.
The ONS is yet to receive and incorporate the full range of
information it uses to produce its mature estimates of GDP
from 2013, so those estimates are particularly likely to be
revised. The MPC’s backcast, which incorporates information
such as the pattern of past revisions and business surveys to
estimate potential revisions, points to a mature estimate of
0.6% in 2015 Q3 (Chart 2.1), and cumulative output growth
between 2012 Q4 and 2015 Q3 is projected to be revised up
by around 0.7 percentage points.
The extent of the slowing in output growth since 2014 Q2 has
varied across industries (Chart 2.2). The weakening in
construction output growth has been particularly marked,
which may in part be related to an earlier slowing in housing
market activity (Section 2.2), although survey indicators of
construction activity have remained stronger than the official
data. Intelligence from the Bank’s Agents suggests that the
recent weakness in the manufacturing sector has been
concentrated in exporters and is related, in part, to the
appreciation in sterling and the weakness in global growth
(Section 1). The strength of sterling and weak global growth
may also have weighed on service sector output growth.
Despite a slight slowing in business and financial services
10 Inflation Report November 2015
Table 2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in August Developments since August
Cost of credit Broadly in line with expectations
• Credit spreads to decline slightly. • Credit spreads declined slightly in 2015 Q3.
Consumer spending Broadly in line with expectations
• Quarterly consumption growth a
little above ¾%.
• Saving ratio of 5½% by 2016 Q1.
• Growth was 0.9% in 2015 Q2, and expected
to average around ¾% for the rest of 2015.
• Saving ratio revised down in Blue Book 2015.
Housing market Broadly in line with expectations
• A rise in mortgage approvals to
around 70,000 a month on average
in 2015 Q4.
• House prices to increase by just over
½% per month in 2015 Q4 and
2016 Q1.
• Quarterly housing investment
growth to average around 1%.
• Mortgage approvals averaged around 70,000
a month in 2015 Q3.
• Average of Halifax and Nationwide indices
rose by around ½% per month in Q3.
• Housing investment fell by 2.7% in 2015 Q2.
Investment Slightly weaker than expected
• Quarterly business investment
growth of around 1½%.
• Past growth revised down in Blue Book 2015.
Investment grew by 1.6% in 2015 Q2.
Exports Broadly in line with expectations
• Average quarterly growth in
UK exports of slightly below ½%.
• Exports stronger than expected in Q2, but
expected to unwind in H2. There is, however,
greater-than-usual uncertainty around those
data.
Output growth was 0.5% in Q3, having fallen back since mid-2014. While weak global growth and
the past appreciation in sterling will weigh on net trade, private sector domestic demand growth is
projected to remain resilient, with support from the past easing in credit conditions and continued
real income growth.
2 Demand and output
 Section 2 Demand and output 11
output growth, however, overall growth in service sector
output remains robust, in line with its average rate since
mid-2010. The strength in oil and gas extraction is likely, in
part, to reflect the impact of past high levels of investment.
The boost to growth from extraction, however, is likely to be
temporary as recent weak investment and low oil prices weigh
on output over time.
Evidence from industry surveys suggests that aggregate
output is likely to grow at a similar rate in Q4. Reflecting that,
output growth is projected to remain at 0.6% in 2015 Q4 —
consistent with a preliminary estimate of 0.5% (Chart 2.1).
Beyond this, output growth is expected to remain at around
this rate, as continued real income growth and some decline in
private saving is projected to keep domestic demand growth
resilient in the face of adverse external developments
(Section 2.2).
There is a risk, however, that developments in emerging
economies (Section 1) could affect UK growth prospects by
more than expected, both directly through the
United Kingdom’s balance of income from abroad
(Section 2.3) and through the effects of confidence and
uncertainty on domestic demand. Measures of financial
market volatility increased in August and September and there
is some evidence that other measures of uncertainty have
begun to pick up (Chart 2.3), which could weigh on domestic
demand.
2.2 Domestic demand
Household spending
Consumption is often the main driver of domestic demand
growth and is the largest component of expenditure, at
around 65% of the total. Consumption growth has been
strengthening since mid-2013 and was 0.9% in 2015 Q2, in
line with its pre-crisis average rate (Table 2.B) and
expectations at the time of the August Report. Following the
recent Blue Book revisions, consumption growth now appears
to have been slightly stronger between 2012 and 2014 (see
the box on page 13).
Household consumption growth has been boosted by strong
growth in real incomes. Overall real incomes grew by 2.4% in
the four quarters to 2015 Q2 (Table 2.C), compared with a
little over 1% on average during 2014. Employment growth
and a strengthening in average wage growth (Section 3) have
supported nominal income growth. In addition, past falls in
energy, food and import prices (Section 4) have increased the
purchasing power of a given level of nominal income.
Income growth has, however, been outpaced by consumption
growth over the past few years (Table 2.C). Having risen
during the 2008/09 recession, the household saving ratio has
fallen since 2010. But, as explained in the box on page 13, in
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2012 13 14 15
Projection(c)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
Projection of preliminary GDP
 at the time of the August Report(c)
GDP
Estimate implied by the mode of the latest backcast(b)
+
–
Chart 2.1 GDP growth slowed in Q3
Bank staff’s projections for near-term output growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures. GDP is at market prices.
(b) The latest backcast, shown to the left of the vertical line, is a judgement about the path for
GDP in the mature estimate of the data. The observation for 2015 Q4, to the right of the
vertical line, is consistent with the MPC’s central projection.
(c) The magenta diamond shows Bank staff’s central projection for the preliminary estimate of
GDP growth for Q3 at the time of the August Report. The green diamond shows the current
staff projection for the preliminary estimate of GDP growth for Q4. The bands on either side
of the diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean
squared error of past Bank staff forecasts for quarterly GDP growth made since 2004.
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2010–12 2013–14 2015
Q1
2015
Q3
2015
Q2
Services (79%)
Construction (6%)
Manufacturing (10%)
Other production(b) (5%)
Percentage points
Averages
1998–
2007
2008–09
GDP growth (per cent)
+
–
Chart 2.2 A fall in construction output weighed on GDP
growth in Q3
Contributions to quarterly GDP growth by output sector(a)
(a) Chained-volume measure. Figures in parentheses are weights in nominal value added in
2012. Contributions may not sum to total as GDP is at market prices while industry output
is gross value added at basic prices, and due to rounding.
(b) Includes: mining and quarrying; electricity, gas and water supply; and agriculture, forestry
and fishing.
12 Inflation Report November 2015
the latest Blue Book estimates the saving ratio now appears to
have been broadly flat over the past year. And while the
saving ratio remains low relative to its pre-crisis average, in
part that reflects a fall in income that goes directly into
pensions, which may be less relevant for current household
spending decisions. Saving out of income available for current
consumption is close to its pre-crisis average rate (see Chart C
in the box on page 13).
One factor that may have supported consumption since 2010,
and depressed the saving ratio, is an improvement in
households’ ability to access credit. Quoted interest rates on
both household mortgages and unsecured personal loans have
fallen markedly over the past six years, and are close to
historical lows (Chart 2.4). Over the past few years, the
availability of credit to households has improved, and the
latest Credit Conditions Survey suggested that secured credit
availability improved further in Q3. These factors may, in part,
be behind a pickup in secured lending and consumer credit
growth over the past year. Consumer credit growth was
around 8% in the four quarters to Q3, though still below its
pre-crisis average rate. And, as set out in the box on page 15,
the proportion of household income used for interest
payments has fallen as interest rates and the level of
household debt relative to income have fallen. Furthermore,
according to the NMG Consulting survey conducted in
September, the proportion of households with debt reporting
concerns about that debt has continued to fall.
Another factor that would tend to influence household saving
is confidence about the economic outlook. Household saving
rose during the financial crisis, coinciding with elevated levels
of uncertainty measures. Both saving and measures of
uncertainty then fell back. More recently, however, there have
been some increases in measures of household uncertainty
(Chart 2.3), and the overall GfK measure of consumer
confidence has fallen slightly since the summer. That might
reflect an increased prominence of economic uncertainty in
media coverage and the recent volatility in financial markets
(Section 1). Overall, measures of uncertainty remain low
relative to pre-crisis levels.
The past improvements in credit conditions and real income
growth are projected to continue to support consumption
growth in the near term. Although bank funding spreads have
widened since August, this is expected to have only a small
effect on consumer credit conditions (Section 1). There is a
risk, however, that recent events lead to a further and more
persistent widening in bank funding spreads and a more
marked tightening in credit conditions, or increase in
uncertainty, both of which could weigh on consumption
growth and domestic demand more generally.
The housing market
Credit conditions faced by households will also affect their
decisions about whether to purchase a home. The demand for
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Differences from averages since 2000
(number of standard deviations)
Range of uncertainty measures(a)
Unemployment expectations(b)
Financial situation expectations(c)
+
–
Chart 2.3 Some measures of uncertainty have picked up
slightly
Measures of uncertainty and household unemployment and
financial expectations
Sources: CBI, Consensus Economics, Dow Jones Factiva, GfK (research carried out on behalf of
the European Commission), ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Range includes: CBI measure of demand uncertainty as a factor likely to limit capital
expenditure for manufacturing and business/consumer services weighted together using
nominal shares in value added. Quarterly average standard deviation of monthly Consensus
Economics forecasts for GDP one and two years ahead seasonally adjusted by Bank staff.
The standard deviation of daily price movements in the FTSE index and sterling ERI within a
quarter. The IBES weighted average standard deviation of twelve-month forward earnings
per share forecasts. And the quarterly average of media reports citing ‘economic
uncertainty’ in five national broadsheet newspapers. A higher number indicates greater
uncertainty.
(b) The question asks how households expect the number of people unemployed to change over
the next twelve months. Data are quarterly averages.
(c) Inverted scale. The question asks how households expect their personal financial situation to
change over the next twelve months. Data are quarterly averages.
Table 2.B Private sector domestic demand growth remained
resilient in Q2
Expenditure components of demand(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
 Averages
 1998– 2008– 2010– 2013– 2015
 2007 09 12 14 Q1 Q2
Household consumption(b) 0.9 -0.6 0.2 0.6 0.8 0.9
Private sector investment 0.7 -4.2 1.2 1.5 1.6 0.7
of which, business investment(c) 0.5 -2.8 1.5 1.1 2.4 1.6
of which, private sector
housing investment 0.8 -7.0 0.8 2.9 0.0 -1.2
Private sector final domestic
demand 0.8 -1.3 0.4 0.9 0.9 0.9
Government consumption
and investment(c) 0.8 0.9 -0.1 0.4 1.1 0.7
Final domestic demand 0.8 -0.8 0.3 0.8 1.0 0.8
Change in inventories(d)(e) 0.0 0.2 0.1 -0.1 -0.4 -0.7
Alignment adjustment(e) 0.0 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.5 -0.6
Domestic demand(f) 0.8 -0.7 0.4 0.7 1.0 -0.6
‘Economic’ exports(g) 1.1 -1.0 0.8 1.0 -1.2 1.9
‘Economic’ imports(g) 1.4 -1.1 0.8 0.9 0.6 -2.7
Net trade(e)(g) -0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.6 1.4
Real GDP at market prices 0.7 -0.7 0.4 0.7 0.4 0.7
Memo: nominal GDP at
market prices 1.3 -0.1 0.9 1.1 0.8 1.2
(a) Chained-volume measures unless otherwise stated.
(b) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Investment data take account of the transfer of nuclear reactors from the public corporation sector to
central government in 2005 Q2.
(d) Excludes the alignment adjustment.
(e) Percentage point contributions to quarterly growth of real GDP.
(f) Includes acquisitions less disposals of valuables.
(g) Excluding the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC) fraud. Official MTIC-adjusted data are not
available for exports, so the headline exports data have been adjusted by an amount equal to the ONS
import adjustment.
 Section 2 Demand and output 13
Revisions to the National Accounts
The Blue Book is an annual ONS publication in which the
National Accounts data are revised to incorporate
methodological improvements and a wider range of
information than in earlier estimates. This box sets out the
main revisions contained in Blue Book 2015, published in
October. The revisions to the estimates of the level of GDP
were small relative to the revisions in Blue Book 2014, where
greater methodological changes were made. Further, these
latest revisions do little to change the size, shape or
composition of UK output growth over the past few years.
The revisions contained in Blue Book 2015 suggest that the
recovery in headline GDP growth since the 2008/09 recession
was slightly stronger than previously estimated. The revisions
were due primarily to methodological improvements to
address the under-coverage of small businesses and concealed
income, and the incorporation of new data. Between 2011 and
2013, annual growth rates are estimated to have been
0.4 percentage points higher on average, while growth in 2014
was revised down by 0.1 percentage points. The overall profile
of four-quarter GDP growth over the past year, however,
remained similar, displaying a gentle deceleration from 3.1%
in 2014 Q2 to 2.4% in 2015 Q2.
While there were some changes in the expenditure
components of growth, these were mostly small (Chart A).
The most notable changes were to consumption and
investment, although there were revisions to other
components as well. The pattern of revisions to consumption
growth was similar to that of overall GDP: consumption
growth was revised up slightly between 2012 and 2014.
Business investment was revised down and, on current
estimates, has risen by around 12 percentage points less since
2006 than in the previous vintage of data (Chart B). Much of
the revision prior to 2012 reflects a reclassification of Network
Rail and Transport for London from the private sector to the
public sector, which has limited economic significance. In
contrast, the downward revisions to investment growth from
2012 onwards largely reflect the incorporation of new data.
There were also some revisions on the income side of the
National Accounts. In particular, estimates of recent growth
in wages and salaries were revised down, bringing them more
into line with the growth rates implied by employment data
from the Labour Force Survey and average weekly earnings.
But, as a consequence of the improvements to address
under-coverage of small businesses and concealed income,
growth in self-employment income between 2007 and 2013
was revised up. The net impact of these revisions to income
and the upward revision to consumption is a lower estimate of
the saving ratio (Chart C). The counterpart to revisions to the
household saving ratio was an upward revision to corporate
profits and corporate saving.
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2010 11 12 13 14
Consumption
Business investment
Housing investment
Government
Trade
Other(b)
GDP growth (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart A Small revisions to the composition of growth
Contributions to revisions to GDP by expenditure component(a)
(a) Calendar-year growth in chained-volume measures.
(b) Calculated as a residual. Includes inventories, the alignment adjustment and the statistical
discrepancy.
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Indices: 2006 = 100
Data available prior to
 Blue Book 2015
Latest ONS data
Chart B Business investment was revised down
Business investment(a)
(a) Chained-volume measures.
8
4
0
4
8
12
16
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Revision to post-tax income (percentage points)(b)
Revision to consumption (inverted, percentage points)(b)
Latest ONS estimate of the saving ratio(c) Saving ratio estimate at the time of the August Report(c)
Saving out of available income(d)
Per cent
+
–
18
Chart C The saving ratio has been broadly flat over the
past year
Revisions to household income, consumption and measures of the
saving ratio(a)
(a) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(b) Contributions to the total revision in the saving ratio.
(c) Percentage of household post-tax income.
(d) Percentage of household post-tax income excluding flows into employment-related pension
schemes. Consistent with Blue Book 2015.
14 Inflation Report November 2015
housing will, in turn, affect the number of homes built and the
level of spending on home improvements to some extent.
Perhaps reflecting a slowdown in housing market activity in
2014, the latest estimates imply a small decline in housing
investment in the four quarters to 2015 Q2, after robust
growth over the previous two years (Table 2.B). In part this
was due to a slowing in growth in transaction-related
expenditure such as estate agent and legal fees. A more
significant factor, however, was slower growth in dwellings
investment — expenditure on new homes and on repairs and
maintenance. Dwellings investment fell by around 2% in the
year to 2015 H1, compared to growth of around 16% in
2014 H1, although these early estimates are often revised
significantly.
While activity in the housing market remains subdued relative
to pre-crisis levels, it has been gradually picking up, supported
by lower mortgage interest rates (Chart 2.4). Having fallen
back during 2014, mortgage approvals for both house
purchase and remortgaging have risen over the past
six months (Chart 2.5). As a consequence, net mortgage
lending increased again in September (Chart 2.6).
In the near term, housing investment growth is projected to
strengthen gradually. Intelligence gathered from construction
companies by the Bank’s Agents suggests that growth in
house-building activity is currently robust and expected to
remain so. Indicators of housing demand remain strong, which
should support a further increase in mortgage approvals and
transaction-related expenditure. But the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors survey suggests that new instructions to
sell remain weak, with reports that existing homeowners are
reluctant to put their homes on the market until there are
more properties to buy. That imbalance between new
instructions to sell and new buyer demand may also be
putting upward pressure on prices: although average annual
inflation in the Halifax and Nationwide house price indices has
fallen slightly from its recent peak of around 10% last
summer, it remained robust at around 6% in September.
Business investment
As set out in the box on page 13, business investment growth
was revised lower in the recent Blue Book, such that the
recovery in investment since 2009 now appears less strong
than in the earlier estimate. Surveys of investment intentions
continue to point to robust rates of investment growth in the
near term, and remain consistent with somewhat stronger
growth of investment over the past 18 months (Chart 2.7).
Continued resilient domestic demand growth, combined with
capacity pressures within companies (Section 3), should
support investment growth in the near term. The ONS
estimate of the rate of return on capital for non-energy sector
private non-financial corporations (PNFCs) is around its
Table 2.C Real income growth has supported consumption
Household income, consumption and saving
 Averages
 1998– 2010– 2013 2014 2015
 2007 12 H1 H2 Q1 Q2
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Real post-tax income(a) 3.1 0.3 -0.8 0.9 1.3 2.0 2.4
Real post-tax labour income(b) 3.1 -0.7 -0.4 1.7 1.4 1.3 2.3
Consumption(c) 3.7 0.6 1.9 2.6 2.7 2.8 3.0
Per cent
Saving ratio(d) 8.7 9.8 6.3 5.0 4.8 4.0 4.7
Saving out of available income(e) -2.0 1.7 -0.5 -3.5 -3.2 -3.3 -2.1
(a) Total available household resources divided by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(b) Wages and salaries plus mixed income less taxes plus net transfers, divided by the consumer expenditure
deflator.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(d) Percentage of household post-tax income.
(e) Percentage of household post-tax income excluding flows into employment-related pension schemes.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2006 08 10 12 14
Per cent
£10,000
 unsecured loan Two-year fixed-rate
 mortgage,
 90% loan to value
Two-year fixed-rate mortgage,
 75% loan to value
Chart 2.4 Household interest rates are close to
historically low levels
Average quoted household interest rates(a)
(a) Sterling-only end-month average quoted rates. The Bank’s quoted rates series are weighted
averages of rates from a sample of banks and building societies with products meeting the
specific criteria (see www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/iadb/notesiadb/
household_int.aspx). Data are non seasonally adjusted.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Approvals per month, thousands
Remortgaging
Other
House purchase
Chart 2.5 Mortgage approvals rose in Q3
Mortgage approvals by type
 Section 2 Demand and output 15
Household balance sheets
The prospects for household spending depend, in part, on the
strength of household balance sheets. Households with high
levels of outstanding debt may need to adjust consumption by
more in response to changes in their circumstances — such as
their income prospects, their ability to borrow or the value of
their assets: there is evidence that households with higher
levels of debt reduced their consumption by more following
the 2008/09 recession than those with lower levels of debt.(1)
This box examines the evidence on the distribution of
household debt, using the results from the latest household
survey carried out on behalf of the Bank by NMG Consulting
during September 2015.(2)
The balance sheet position of households has improved since
the start of the financial crisis. The aggregate ratio of
household debt to income has fallen (Chart A). The NMG
survey results also suggest that the distribution of mortgage
debt to income has become less skewed: the share of
households with mortgage debt in excess of five times their
income has continued to decline (Chart B). These
developments might have reduced the drag on household
spending from indebtedness and contributed to the decline in
the saving ratio. Despite these improvements, however, the
overall debt to income ratio appears to have stabilised at a
relatively high level and the proportion of households with
mortgage debt between three and five times their income
remains similar to that seen immediately prior to the crisis.
The desire to pay down debt, therefore, could continue to
weigh on spending growth.
One of the main ways in which outstanding debt can affect
spending is through the cost of servicing it: the greater the
cost of existing debt, the less income is left for consumption,
the greater the vulnerability to changes in financial
circumstances and the greater the incentive to reduce
consumption and pay down debt.
The proportion of household income spent on servicing debt
has remained broadly stable since 2010 (Chart C). Interest
payments have fallen as a proportion of income as credit
conditions have improved and the stock of debt has declined.
In contrast, repayments of principal have increased, probably
in part reflecting greater voluntary overpayments by
borrowers. The NMG survey results also suggest that the
proportion of households spending over 30% of their income
servicing their mortgage debt has fallen. Past improvements
in credit conditions should continue to support spending
growth, although in the NMG survey the proportion of
households that report putting off spending due to credit
concerns remains elevated.
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
1988 92 96 2000 04 08 12
Per cent
0
Chart A Aggregate household debt to income is lower
than immediately prior to the crisis
Aggregate household debt to income(a)
(a) Total financial liabilities as a percentage of the four-quarter moving sum of nominal total
household resources.
0
1
2
3
4
5
1992 97 2002 07 12
Percentages of households
Between three and four
More than five
Between four
 and five
(a)
Chart B The proportion of households with high
mortgage debt to income has fallen
Proportion of households with high mortgage debt to gross
income ratios
Sources: Living Costs and Food (LCF) Survey, NMG Consulting and Bank calculations.
(a) Data up to 2013 are based on responses to the LCF Survey. Data for 2013 and 2014 are
based on responses to the NMG Consulting survey and have been spliced onto the earlier
LCF Survey data series.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1999 2002 05 08 11 14
Percentages of post-tax income
Debt service ratio
Principal repayments(b)
Interest payments
Chart C The aggregate household debt service ratio has
been stable
Household debt service ratio and its components(a)
(a) Household debt service ratio calculated as mortgage interest payments plus mortgage
principal repayments as a proportion of total household income. Household income has
been adjusted to take into account the effects of Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly
Measured.
(b) Excludes repayments associated with endowment policies. Non seasonally adjusted.
(1) See Bunn, P and Rostom, M (2014), ‘Household debt and spending in the
United Kingdom’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 554;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2015/swp554.pdf.
(2) Results from the survey will be analysed in more detail in a forthcoming
Quarterly Bulletin article.
16 Inflation Report November 2015
highest level for 16 years. Lower oil prices (Section 1),
however, have been weighing on investment in the extraction
sector recently and are likely to continue to do so. Further,
the Q3 Deloitte CFO Survey suggested that greater uncertainty
and the prospect of weakness in emerging economies were
holding back investment for some large, internationally
orientated companies, which also may weigh on domestic
investment growth.
Overall corporate financing conditions appear to have
continued to improve in Q3. As discussed in the latest Credit
Conditions Review, most evidence suggests that the availability
of credit for small and medium-sized enterprises continued to
ease, while conditions for large firms remained favourable.
The widening in corporate bond spreads and increase in
volatility in financial markets (Section 1) is, however, likely to
weigh a little on capital market issuance. And overall net
external finance raised from banks, building societies and
capital markets in Q3 was slightly lower than earlier in the
year (Chart 2.8). Internal funds are also an important source
of financing for investment. PNFC profits have been strong
recently, and PNFC deposit growth was a little under 16% in
annualised terms in the three months to September, above its
pre-crisis average rate of around 8%, which should support
investment growth.
Government spending
The MPC’s forecasts are conditioned on continued fiscal
consolidation. Estimates from the Institute for Fiscal Studies
suggest that, as of fiscal year 2014/15, around half of the
planned consolidation relative to the March 2008 Budget had
taken place. The impact of changes to taxes and public sector
pay may have long-lasting effects on private sector
expenditure, and will depend on how households and
companies react, as set out in the box on page 16 of the
August 2015 Report.
2.3 External demand and UK net trade
Net trade
Net trade was strong in Q2 according to the latest estimates,
reflecting a sharp fall in import volumes and a rise in exports.
Early estimates of National Accounts data are uncertain and
subject to revision. Moreover, the ONS released a notice on
2 November outlining some issues relating to the recent trade
data, and giving guidance about their use.(1) These trade
estimates are, therefore, more uncertain than usual. On the
current estimates, monthly data on trade in goods for July and
August, together with Bank staff estimates, suggest that the
contribution to GDP growth from net trade turned negative
again in Q3. Revisions to the trade data have not affected the
outlook for net trade, which will depend, in part, on
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2005 07 09 11 13 15
£ billions
+
–
Chart 2.6 Net mortgage lending has increased further
Monthly net mortgage lending
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Latest ONS business investment data(a)
Range of investment
 intention surveys(c)
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Business investment data available
 at the time of the August Report(b)
+
–
Chart 2.7 Surveys suggest robust business investment
growth
Investment intention surveys and business investment
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures. Data are to 2015 Q2.
(b) Chained-volume measures. Data are to 2015 Q1.
(c) Includes survey measures of investment intentions from the Bank’s Agents (companies’
intended changes in investment over the next twelve months), BCC (net percentage balance
of companies who say they have increased planned investment in plant and machinery over
the past three months) and CBI (net percentage balance of companies who say they have
revised up planned investment in plant and machinery over the next twelve months), scaled
to match the mean and variance of four-quarter business investment growth since 2000.
BCC data are non seasonally adjusted. Measure weights together sectoral surveys using
shares in real business investment. Data are to 2015 Q3.
(1) The ONS notice can be found at www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/uktrade/uk-trade/
august-2015/index.html.
 Section 2 Demand and output 17
movements in the sterling exchange rate. Although sterling
has depreciated by around 2% since the August Report, it
remains 18% above its trough in March 2013 (Section 1). That
appreciation of sterling, together with weak world GDP
growth, is expected to weigh on UK exports and boost imports
such that net trade continues to drag on GDP growth over the
next few years (Section 5).
A slowing in emerging economies could pose a downside risk
to the outlook for net trade. Direct trade links between the
United Kingdom and emerging economies — including China
— make up around one quarter of UK exports. Further, as set
out in the box on page 2, there are a number of other channels
through which a slowdown in China could affect the
United Kingdom.
The nominal trade balance — exports less imports — is one
element of the balance of payments between the
United Kingdom and the rest of the world. The trade deficit
narrowed to around 0.7% of GDP in Q2. In line with the
projection for net trade, the trade deficit is expected to have
widened to around 2% of GDP in Q3, close to its average over
the past decade (Chart 2.9).
The current account
In addition to payments relating to net trade flows, there are
other payment flows between the United Kingdom and other
countries. UK residents receive income on their investments in
other countries, and pay out income on the investments that
residents of other countries have in the United Kingdom: the
net value of these payments makes up the vast majority of the
primary income balance.
The current account — the balance of all of these payments,
together with other transfers — narrowed to 3.6% of GDP in
Q2 (Chart 2.9), but is projected to widen in Q3 along with the
trade deficit. Revisions in Pink Book 2015 reduced the current
account deficit between 2012 and 2014 by around 0.5% of
GDP on average. As the revisions were larger in more recent
years, the deterioration in the current account since 2012 now
appears less marked than it did three months ago. The deficit
in 2014 is now estimated to have been 5.1% of GDP,
compared to 5.9% previously.
The revisions to the current account deficit largely reflect an
upward revision to the primary income balance following the
incorporation of new data. Although the deterioration in the
primary income balance since 2012 now appears less marked,
the latest estimates still show a significant weakening, in part,
reflecting weak investment income from the euro area. It is
unclear for how long this negative income balance will persist:
the outlook is highly uncertain, and will be sensitive to global
developments.
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
2003 05 07 09 11 13 15
Loans
Bonds(b)(c)
Equities(b)
Commercial paper(b)
Total(d)
£ billions
+
–
Chart 2.8 Net external finance raised was lower in Q3
than earlier in the year
Net external finance raised by PNFCs(a)
(a) Includes sterling and foreign currency funds.
(b) Non seasonally adjusted.
(c) Includes stand-alone and programme bonds.
(d) As component series are not all seasonally adjusted, the total may not equal the sum of its
components.
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
2006 09 12 15
Secondary income
Primary income
Trade balance(a)
Current account balance
Percentages of nominal GDP
+
–
Chart 2.9 The current account deficit has narrowed
since 2014 Q4
UK current account
(a) The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for the trade balance in Q3 based on data for
July and August.
18 Inflation Report November 2015
Table 3.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in August Developments since August
Unemployment Lower than expected
• Headline LFS unemployment rate to
decline to around 5½% by the end
of 2015.
• The unemployment rate fell to 5.4% in the
three months to August and is expected to be
slightly lower by the end of the year.
Participation Slightly weaker than expected
• The labour market participation rate
to pick up slightly over the rest of
the year to a little under 63½%.
• Was unchanged in the three months to
August. Likely to pick up slightly and remain
around 63.4% in the coming quarters.
Average hours Weaker than expected
• Average hours worked to increase
by around ½% over the rest of the
year.
• Average hours fell in the three months to
August. Expected to rise slightly in coming
quarters.
Productivity Stronger than expected
• Hourly labour productivity growth
to average a little under ¼% a
quarter.
• Hourly labour productivity growth was 1.5% in
the four quarters to Q2 and quarterly growth
was stronger than expected.
Earnings growth Slightly weaker than expected
• Four-quarter AWE growth to
remain around 3¼% in Q3.
• Four-quarter AWE growth was 3% in the three
months to August.
Over the past few years, growth in the supply of output has
been accounted for mainly by an increase in total hours
worked (Chart 3.1), as slack in the labour market has been
absorbed and unemployment has fallen. Since 2014 Q4,
however, total hours worked have risen only gently
(Section 3.1) and the share of output growth accounted for by
rising productivity has increased (Section 3.2). Having picked
up sharply at the beginning of the year, regular pay growth has
changed little in recent months and remains some way below
its pre-crisis average rate (Section 3.3).
A key determinant of the extent to which output can grow
before it begins to put upward pressure on wages and other
domestic costs is the degree of slack in the economy — that is,
the level of output relative to potential supply. The pace of
wage growth suggests that there is still slack in the labour
market, and top-down statistical estimates also suggest
demand lies some way below potential supply. Other
indicators, however, suggest that supply constraints may be
tighter than suggested by wages, and that wage growth could
accelerate as the pressures posed by recruitment difficulties
and above-average levels of capacity utilisation feed through.
Taking all the evidence together, the MPC’s best collective
judgement is that output remains slightly below its potential
level, with slack broadly in the region of ½% of GDP. There is
substantial uncertainty about that judgement and a range of
views among MPC members.
3.1 Labour market developments and slack
Total hours worked rose by less than expected in the three
months to August. While employment growth was strong at
140,000, average hours worked fell slightly (Chart 3.2) against
expectations for a rise.
The implications of the softer-than-expected growth in total
hours for wages and hence domestic cost pressures will
depend on the extent to which it reflects weaker labour
demand or tighter labour supply conditions than previously
judged. Weaker labour demand would tend to be associated
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage points
Hourly productivity(a)(b)
GDP(a)
Total hours
 worked(b)
+
–
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measure, based on the MPC’s best collective judgement about the final
estimate of GDP. Percentage change on a year earlier.
(b) Based on Bank staff’s assumption for population growth, as explained in the May Report.
Chart 3.1 Productivity accounted for a greater share of
GDP growth in Q2 than in recent quarters
Decomposition of four-quarter GDP growth
3 Supply and the labour market
Total hours worked rose modestly in the three months to August, as growth in employment only
slightly outweighed a fall in average hours worked. Other indicators, however, suggest that labour
demand growth remains robust, and the unemployment rate has fallen slightly. Both wage and
productivity growth have picked up since last year, but remain below pre-crisis rates.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 19
Table 3.B Indicators of labour demand remain strong
Employment growth, vacancies and survey indicators of employment
intentions
 Averages 2015
 2000– 2010– 2013 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3
 07(a) 12
Employment growth(b) 70 67 95 152 202 -63 140
of which, employees(b) 55 33 62 139 189 -54 120
of which, self-employed
and other(b)(c) 16 35 33 14 13 -9 20
Vacancies to labour
force ratio(d) 2.07 1.47 1.66 2.04 2.26 2.23 2.24
Surveys of employment intentions(e)
BCC(f) 19 8 22 29 27 29 24
CBI(f) 5.4 -0.4 13.8 26.8 22.4 28.0 7.9
Agents(g) 0.8 0.3 0.4 1.3 1.1 1.3 0.9
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS (including the Labour Force Survey) and Bank calculations.
(a) Unless otherwise stated.
(b) Changes relative to the previous quarter in thousands. Figures for 2015 Q3 are data for the three months to
August 2015.
(c) Other comprises unpaid family workers and those on government-supported training and employment
programmes classified as being in employment.
(d) Excludes vacancies in agriculture, forestry and fishing. Average is 2001 Q2 to 2007.
(e) Measures for the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the
CBI (manufacturing, financial services and business/consumer/professional services) are weighted together
using employee jobs shares from Workforce Jobs. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
(f) Net percentage balance of companies expecting their workforce to increase over the next three months.
(g) End-quarter observation. The scores refer to companies’ employment intentions over the next six months.
The scores are on a scale of -5 to +5.
with a slower absorption of slack and hence weaker cost
pressures. But the implications for wages of weaker labour
demand would differ depending on the extent to which it is
due to a weaker outlook for demand for goods and services,
which would weigh on wage growth, or stronger productivity
growth which would be expected to support wage growth. In
contrast, tighter supply conditions could indicate that both
cost pressures and wage growth will pick up more rapidly as
companies attempt to increase their workforce.
Labour demand and spare capacity within companies
Indicators suggest that labour demand growth has softened
somewhat but remains relatively robust (Table 3.B). Survey
balances of companies’ employment intentions have fallen but
remain above their pre-crisis average levels. And the number
of vacancies, relative to the size of the labour force, is around
its pre-crisis peak.
Moreover, surveys of companies’ capacity utilisation indicate
that capacity pressures are currently close to or above past
average levels (Chart 3.3). So labour demand growth is likely
to remain robust as demand for domestic goods and services
continues to grow (Section 2). Demand for additional labour
will, however, also depend on productivity: if the recent
pickup in productivity growth (Section 3.2) is sustained it
would temper labour demand, all else equal.
Average hours worked
The ability of employers to increase the number of hours
worked without putting upward pressure on wage growth, will
depend on how many hours employees desire to work. The
number of hours people report they would like to work has
fallen somewhat over the past six months (Chart 3.2), and the
proportion of those in part-time employment because they
could not find a full-time job has fallen steadily from its peak
in 2013. That is likely to reflect in part the increase in
household real incomes (Section 2). As real income growth
has picked up, employees may feel able to work fewer hours
and still maintain their level of expenditure.
Measures of desired hours remain elevated compared to
pre-crisis levels and the MPC judges that there is some scope
for average hours to rise over the medium term without
putting pressure on wage growth. In other words, the
medium-term equilibrium level of average hours is judged to
remain above the current level of hours worked (Chart 3.2).
There could, however, be less scope for average hours to rise:
the fall in reported desired hours may suggest the
medium-term equilibrium level has fallen, and a continued
increase in real incomes could lead to further falls in desired
hours.
Labour supply
How much employers can continue to increase the size of
their workforce without putting upward pressure on wage
31.0
31.5
32.0
32.5
33.0
33.5
34.0
1990 95 2000 05 10 15
Weekly hours
Actual average hours(b)
Desired hours(a)
Central estimate of
 medium-term equilibrium
 average hours
0.0
Sources: Labour Force Survey (LFS) and Bank calculations.
(a) Number of hours that the currently employed report that they would like to work, on
average, per week calculated from LFS microdata, which have been seasonally adjusted by
Bank staff. Calculation based on Bell, D and Blanchflower, D (2013), ‘How to measure
underemployment?’, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper No. 13–7.
Data available up to 2015 Q2.
(b) The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2015 Q3, based on ONS data to August 2015.
Chart 3.2 Average hours have fallen
Average weekly hours: actual, desired and Bank staff’s estimate of
medium-term equilibrium
growth will depend on the size of the population, people’s
desire to work and their suitability for available jobs.
Growth in labour supply derives mainly from population
growth. As discussed in the May Report, net migration rose
during 2014, which led Bank staff to revise up their population
growth assumptions in anticipation of revisions to the ONS’s
population estimates and projections. In October, the ONS
revised up its population projections. Changes to the net
migration projections were broadly as expected, but the ONS
also revised down its projections for natural population
change. Overall, the ONS estimates that population growth
picked up during 2013–14, but it is projected to slow over the
next three years (Chart 3.4). These are due to be incorporated
into the Labour Force Survey data in 2016. As explained in the
box on pages 30–31 of the May 2015 Report, while net
migration will contribute to labour supply, it will also
contribute to domestic demand.
Overall labour supply will depend on the rate of participation.
That rate was unchanged in the three months to August
compared to the previous three months. As explained in the
May Report, Bank staff judge that labour force participation is
close to its medium-term equilibrium rate (Chart 3.5).
Consistent with that, the number of economically inactive
people reporting to the Labour Force Survey that they want a
job remains around its pre-crisis average level.
The influence of those seeking employment on wage growth
will depend on the ease with which they can find suitable jobs.
Following sharp falls since mid-2013, the unemployment rate
has fallen only slightly in recent months and was 5.4% in the
three months to August (Chart 3.6). The claimant count — a
timely indicator of the unemployment rate — has not changed
since March. In the near term, unemployment is projected to
fall gradually to 5.3% in the three months to December. It
then falls a little further over the rest of the MPC’s forecast
period (Section 5).
Bank staff judge that the long-term equilibrium
unemployment rate remains around 5%, although there is
considerable uncertainty around that. One upside risk to that
estimate is a possible rise in the mismatch between the jobs
available and the pool of unemployed. The cycle in
unemployment since the start of the crisis seems to have been
driven largely by changes in labour demand: as vacancies fell
and then rose, so unemployment rose and then fell
(Chart 3.7). But given the current high level of vacancies, the
unemployment rate is somewhat higher than would be
suggested by their pre-crisis relationship. The shift in the
relationship between vacancies and unemployment may
suggest that the composition of the unemployed has become
less well matched to the available jobs. That would mean that
further falls in the unemployment rate would be associated
with upward pressure on wage growth, which would be
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1997 2000 03 06 09 12 15 18
Per cent
ONS projection
20 Inflation Report November 2015
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
1999 2003 07 11 15
Differences from 1999 Q1–2007 Q3 averages
(number of standard deviations)
BCC
Agents
CBI
+
–
Chart 3.3 Little sign of spare capacity within companies
Survey indicators of capacity utilisation(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Mid-year 16+ population estimates and projections.
Chart 3.4 Population growth has been robust
Annual population growth(a)
61.5
62.0
62.5
63.0
63.5
64.0
64.5
1992 94 96 98 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Per cent
Participation rate(b)
Central estimate of
 equilibrium participation rate
0.0
Chart 3.5 Participation has been broadly stable
Participation rate and Bank staff estimates of the medium-term
equilibrium participation rate(a)
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures are produced by weighting together surveys from the Bank’s Agents
(manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the CBI
(manufacturing, financial services, business/consumer/professional services and distributive
trades) using shares in nominal value added. The surveys are adjusted to have a mean of
zero and a variance of one over 1999 Q1 to 2007 Q3. The BCC data are non seasonally
adjusted.
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Percentages of 16+ population.
(b) The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2015 Q3, based on ONS data to August 2015.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 21
consistent with reports of elevated recruitment difficulties.
Indeed, the Bank’s Agents report that recruitment difficulties
have increased over the past year and are above pre-crisis
levels.
The shift in the relationship between vacancies and
unemployment, however, is likely to prove temporary. Those
who have been out of work for longer tend to find it harder to
find a suitable job. And, while the proportion of people out of
work for less than a year is below its pre-crisis average rate,
the proportion out of work for more than a year remains
elevated (Chart 3.8). So the unemployment rate is likely to
continue to fall gradually as those long-term unemployed
move into employment.
The long-term equilibrium unemployment rate could also be
lower than judged, reflecting the impact of structural changes.
Over the past two decades, greater participation among older
age groups and the continued increase in educational
attainment have tended to be associated with increased
employment rates; if these trends continue, they could lead
to a lower average unemployment rate than in the past.
Changes in government policy over recent decades will also
affect the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. For
example, it is possible that the introduction of the National
Living Wage could put some upward pressure on both wages
and unemployment.(1) But other changes, such as to welfare
policies, may have increased the incentive to move into
employment. The overall effect of these policy changes on
unemployment is highly uncertain.
On the whole, the MPC judges that risks around the long-term
equilibrium unemployment rate of 5% are broadly balanced,
though there are a range of views among MPC members.
3.2 Productivity
Another key determinant of supply and wage growth is
productivity. Revisions in Blue Book 2015 indicate that
productivity growth has been slightly stronger between 2011
and the first half of 2014 than had been expected at the time
of the August Report (Chart 3.9). And having picked up
sharply in 2015 Q2, four-quarter hourly productivity growth is
likely to have slowed only slightly to 1.3% in Q3.
The recent pickup in productivity growth appears, in part, to
reflect a waning in some of those factors that had previously
been dragging on its underlying trend, such as past weak
investment in both physical capital and ‘intangible’ capital
such as employees’ skills, and slow adoption of the latest
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
456789
2002–08
2009
2010–12
Unemployment rate (per cent)
Vacancy rate, per cent
2013
2014
2015
0.0
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
2012 13 14 15
Per cent
Projection
Three-month
 unemployment rate
Monthly projections
 in August
0.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
1993 95 97 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Under six months
Six to twelve months
Over twelve months
Chart 3.7 Unemployment has been high relative to
vacancies since 2010
Vacancy and unemployment rates(a)
Chart 3.6 Unemployment likely to fall gradually
Bank staff’s near-term unemployment rate projection(a)
Chart 3.8 Long-term unemployment remains elevated
Unemployment rates by duration(a)
(1) For further discussion of the impact of the National Living Wage see the box on
page 24 of the August 2015 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/aug.pdf.
Sources: Labour Force Survey (LFS) and Bank calculations.
(a) The magenta diamonds show Bank staff’s central projections for the headline unemployment
rate for June, July, August and September 2015, at the time of the August Report. The green
diamonds show the current staff projections for the headline unemployment rate for
September, October, November and December 2015. The bands on either side of the
diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean squared error
of past Bank staff forecasts for the three-month LFS unemployment rate.
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Vacancies expressed as a percentage of the sum of total employment and vacancies, and
unemployment as a percentage of the economically active 16+ population. Vacancies
exclude agriculture, forestry and fishing. Quarterly data except for the final data point,
which shows unemployment for the three months to August 2015; the vacancy rate is
calculated using vacancies data to September 2015 and employment data for the three
months to August.
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The number of people unemployed in each duration category, divided by the economically
active population. Dashed lines are averages from 2002 to 2007.
technology.(1) As the effect of these factors continues to
diminish that should support productivity growth. Further, the
Bank’s Agents report that some employers are responding to
recruitment difficulties by trying to increase the productivity
of their existing workforce.
Some of the recent pickup in productivity growth may also
reflect the impact of cyclical and compositional factors on
measured productivity growth. Some companies may have
been working at above normal capacity to meet demand
(Chart 3.3) and hence measured productivity growth may
ease as capacity pressures ease. Acting in the opposite
direction, compositional effects appear to have been weighing
on measured productivity growth over the past 18 months as
employment growth was concentrated in lower-skilled roles.
This could have dragged on overall productivity growth if
these roles have typically been less productive than an average
role. The impact of those effects, however, appears to have
lessened in Q2 and may have helped support measured
productivity growth.
The MPC judges that productivity growth is likely to slow a
little in the near term before picking up modestly over the
next few years, as the factors weighing on it wane further
(Section 5). Although there is substantial uncertainty around
this judgement.
3.3 Wages
Pay growth is a key determinant of domestic cost pressures
(Section 4), and will reflect both slack in the economy and
productivity growth. Wage growth has been volatile in recent
quarters. This partly reflects changes in bonus payments,
which may not be a good indicator of underlying wage
pressures. Stripping out bonuses, regular pay growth has
picked up by around 2 percentage points since 2014 Q2
(Table 3.C), although it has been broadly unchanged in recent
months and was 2.8% in the three months to August.
Despite the pickup in wage growth over the past year, it
remains some way below its pre-crisis average rate. That in
part could be because the impact of the tightening labour
market (Section 3.1) on wages has been slow to come through
or has been masked. Job-to-job flows and resignations have
remained relatively low (Chart 3.10), which could be limiting
the influence of starting salaries on average wage growth. The
REC survey has suggested stronger growth in starting salaries
than average wages for some time, although that balance has
fallen somewhat over the past year (Chart 3.11). As
confidence in the job market among existing employees
improves further, those higher starting salaries and the need
22 Inflation Report November 2015
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Per cent
August 2015
 Inflation Report
November 2015
 Inflation Report
+
–
Table 3.C Regular pay growth is likely to soften slightly in Q3
Whole-economy earnings
 Averages 2015
 2001–07 2008 Q3– 2014 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3
 2010 Q2 H1 H2
Percentage changes on a year earlier
(1) Total AWE(a) 4.3 1.4 0.9 1.6 2.3 2.6 3.2
(2) AWE regular pay(a)(b) 4.0 2.1 1.0 1.6 2.3 2.8 2.6
(1)–(2) Bonus
contribution(a)(c) 0.3 -0.7 -0.1 0.1 0.0 -0.2 0.7
Pay settlements(d) 3.2 2.5 2.0 2.1 2.0 2.2 2.2
Memo: private sector
regular pay(a) 3.9 1.6 1.3 1.9 2.8 3.3 3.0
Sources: Bank of England, Incomes Data Services, the Labour Research Department, ONS and XpertHR.
(a) Figures for 2015 Q3 are estimated based on data for July and August and Bank staff’s projections for
September.
(b) Whole-economy total pay excluding bonuses and arrears of pay.
(c) Percentage points. The bonus contribution does not always equal the difference between total average
weekly earnings (AWE) growth and AWE regular pay growth due to rounding.
(d) Average over the past twelve months, based on monthly data.
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) GDP per hour worked, based on the backcast for the final estimate of GDP. Based on Bank
staff’s assumption for population growth, as explained in the May Report. The blue and magenta
diamonds show Bank staff’s projection for Q2 at the time of the August Report and their current
projection for Q3 respectively.
Chart 3.9 Productivity growth has picked up
Four-quarter hourly labour productivity growth(a)
(1) See page 25 of the May 2015 Inflation Report for a discussion of how changes in the
composition of the labour force, impaired resource allocation and weak investment
had been weighing on productivity growth;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/may.pdf.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1998 2001 04 07 10 13
Per cent of employment
Voluntary job-to-job flows(c)
Resignations(b)
Chart 3.10 Flows between jobs remain subdued
Resignations and voluntary job-to-job flows(a)
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Based on two-quarter longitudinal microdata. Seasonally adjusted by Bank staff. Expressed
as a percentage of 16–64 employment.
(b) Number of people who report resigning three months ago, and report being employed,
unemployed or inactive.
(c) Number of people who report resigning three months ago, and report being in employment
for less than three months.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 23
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Differences from averages since 1998
(number of standard deviations) Per cent
Private sector annual AWE growth(a)
 (right-hand scale)
REC(d) (left-hand scale)
BCC survey(b)(c)
 (left-hand scale)
Agents’ scores(b)
 (left-hand scale)
+
–
+
–
Chart 3.11 Earnings growth has picked up over the year
but remains weak
Private sector earnings and indicators of pay growth
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, KPMG/REC/Markit, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Excludes bonuses and arrears of pay.
(b) The Bank’s Agents’ scores and the BCC survey are produced by weighting together indices for
the manufacturing and service sector according to their employment shares. The Bank’s
Agents’ scores are the end-quarter score.
(c) Four-quarter moving average measure. Non seasonally adjusted.
(d) The REC measure is produced by weighting together survey indices for the pay of permanent
and temporary placements using shares in employment; quarterly averages.
to retain staff are likely to pull wage growth up further. The
Bank’s Agents report that some employers are intending to
respond to recruitment difficulties by offering increased wages
to new recruits and existing staff with key skills.
Changes in the composition of the workforce (Section 3.2)
may be another reason why measured wage growth may not
reflect underlying capacity pressures in the economy. Bank
staff estimate that the drag on annual wage growth from
compositional factors was around ½ a percentage point in
2015 Q2, though this was smaller than the estimate for Q1, of
around 1 percentage point.
As explained in the August Report, the introduction of a
National Living Wage is also likely to add to wage growth over
coming years. The overall impact on average wage growth is
estimated to be very small, at less than 0.1 percentage points
per year. But the National Living Wage is likely to
disproportionately affect the wages of those in some sectors,
such as hospitality, retail and support services.
Wage growth is expected to continue to be volatile in the near
term, due to the timing of bonus payments (Table 3.C).
Beyond that, given developments in the labour market
(Section 3.1), wage growth is expected to pick up, further
outstripping productivity growth as the effects of the
absorption of slack are passed through (Section 5).
24 Inflation Report November 2015
CPI inflation was -0.1% in September. The current low level of inflation can largely be accounted
for by lower energy, food and other imported goods prices, although it also reflects muted domestic
cost growth. Inflation is projected to pick up over coming months, but less quickly than projected
in August. Unit labour cost growth rose to 1.8% in Q2 and is projected to strengthen further,
consistent with inflation rising back to the 2% target in around two years. Inflation expectations
remain broadly consistent with the MPC’s 2% target.
4.1 Consumer price developments and the
near-term outlook
CPI inflation was -0.1% in September, lower than projected
at the time of the August Report (Chart 4.1) due to weaker
energy and clothing and footwear prices. As inflation remains
more than 1 percentage point below the 2% inflation target,
the Governor has written a fourth consecutive open letter to
the Chancellor as required by the MPC’s remit.(1)
Roughly four fifths of the current weakness in inflation relative
to the target — 1.7 percentage points — is due to past falls in
energy, food and other goods prices. Those falls are judged
predominantly to reflect global factors: compared with a year
ago, the US dollar oil price is around 44% lower and
agricultural commodity prices are around 11% lower. In
addition, the 18% appreciation of sterling since its trough in
March 2013, and the resulting falls in imported goods prices
(Section 4.2), will also have weighed on UK inflation.
Around one fifth of the weakness in inflation relative to the
target — 0.4 percentage points — is due to weak services price
inflation. While some services are imported and will be
affected by changes in import prices, the weakness in services
inflation is judged largely to reflect subdued domestic cost
pressures. A consequence of the slack that opened up in the
labour market after the 2008/09 recession has been relatively
low growth of wages (Section 3) and hence domestic costs.
A range of measures of core inflation — which exclude volatile
components such as food and energy prices — averaged
around 1% in September (Chart 4.2).(2) Some of the weakness
in core inflation is likely to reflect the impact of falls in import
prices, which will have affected the prices of many goods and
4 Costs and prices
1
0
1
2
3
4
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
2013 14
Projection
15
+
–
CPI
Chart 4.1 CPI inflation projected to rise by the end of the year
Bank staff’s projection for near-term CPI inflation(a)
(a) The red diamonds show Bank staff’s central projection for CPI inflation in July, August and September 2015
at the time of the August Inflation Report. The blue diamonds show the staff projection for October,
November and December 2015. The bands on each side of the blue and red diamonds show the root mean
squared error of the projections for CPI inflation one, two and three months ahead made since 2004.
Table 4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in August Developments since August
Unit labour costs Broadly on track
• Four-quarter whole-economy unit
labour cost growth to reach 2% by the
end of the year.
• Four-quarter unit labour cost growth was
1.8% in Q2.
Household energy prices Weaker than expected
• Petrol and diesel prices to fall by
around 4% in Q3.
• Domestic gas prices to fall by 5% by
the end of the year. Domestic
electricity prices to remain flat.
• Petrol and diesel prices fell by 6% in Q3.
Further falls in oil prices likely to weigh on
prices.
• Domestic gas price cuts expected a little
later than at the time of August Report.
Import prices Broadly on track
• Import prices to be broadly flat in
2015 Q4 and 2016 Q1.
• Import prices excluding fuel and erratics
fell by 1% in the four quarters to 2015 Q2
according to the latest estimate. There is,
however, greater-than-usual uncertainty
around those data.
Inflation expectations Broadly on track
• Indicators of inflation expectations
consistent with meeting the 2%
inflation target in the medium term.
• Movements in indicators of inflation
expectations have been mixed. On
balance, measures are broadly consistent
with the 2% target.
(1) The letter can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/
pdf/cpiletter051115.pdf.
(2) For a detailed discussion of core inflation measures see the box on pages 28–29 of the
August 2015 Report; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
inflationreport/2015/aug.pdf.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 25
services. But it will also reflect subdued domestic cost
pressures over the recent past.
Inflation is projected to start rising over coming months as
the past falls in energy prices start to drop out of the annual
comparison (Chart 4.3). CPI inflation is projected to rise to
0.4% in December, and to 0.7% in March 2016. That profile is
weaker than projected three months ago. That in part reflects
further falls in oil prices (Section 1). US dollar oil futures prices
are around 11% lower, while in sterling terms prices are around
10% lower than in August (Chart 4.4). Those declines have
reduced the inflation projection, relative to the August Report,
by around 0.1 percentage points until 2016 H2 (Chart 4.5). It
also reflects the weaker outturn for clothing and footwear
prices, which will weigh on CPI inflation a little more than
previously expected.
Wholesale gas futures prices have also fallen further since the
August Report, and are around 10% lower than three months
ago (Chart 4.4). One of the major domestic energy suppliers
cut its gas prices by 5% from the end of August. As in the
August Report, the other five major household suppliers are
assumed to reduce their prices by a similar amount though
that is now assumed to occur in early 2016, slightly later than
previously assumed. Given the further fall in wholesale gas
prices, domestic energy prices are assumed to be reduced
further in late 2016. Overall, the contribution of domestic
energy prices to annual CPI inflation is projected to average
around -0.1 percentage points over 2016–17.
The outlook for inflation in the medium term will depend on
the outlook for import prices and the extent to which past
falls are still to be passed through fully to CPI (Section 4.2), on
the extent to which domestic cost growth rises as the
remaining slack in the economy is absorbed (Section 4.3) and
on inflation expectations (Section 4.4). Overall, the MPC
projects that inflation will return to the 2% inflation target in
around two years, as domestic cost growth picks up and the
drag from past falls in import prices wanes (Section 5).
4.2 Imported price pressures
As well as lower energy prices, a factor weighing on
businesses’ costs and CPI inflation has been weak import price
inflation. In part that reflects lower global commodity prices
and subdued inflation rates in many countries: foreign export
prices have fallen by around ½% over the past two years. The
appreciation of sterling since March 2013 (Section 1) means
the fall in foreign export prices in sterling terms has been
much larger, at around 12% over the past two years.
As discussed in the ONS notice released on 2 November,(1)
due to a number of issues with the National Accounts
measure of the import price deflator, the ONS has advised
2
0
2
4
6
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Percentage points
Projection(c)
Other goods(b) (35%)
Energy (8%)
Food and non-alcoholic
 beverages (11%)
Services (47%) CPI (per cent)
+
–
Chart 4.3 The drag on inflation from past energy price falls is
likely to diminish
Contributions to CPI inflation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Department of Energy and Climate Change, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Contributions to annual CPI inflation. Figures in parentheses are weights in the CPI basket in 2015,
and may not sum to 100 due to rounding.
(b) Calculated as the difference between CPI inflation and the other contributions identified in the chart.
(c) Bank staff estimates. Electricity, gas and other fuels estimates are conditioned on the assumption
that utilities companies reduce gas prices by an average of 5% in early 2016. Fuels and lubricants
estimates use Department of Energy and Climate Change petrol price data for October 2015 and are
then based on the November 2015 sterling oil futures curve shown in Chart 4.4.
(1) The ONS notice can be found at www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/uktrade/uk-trade/august2015/index.html.
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1997 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Range of core CPI measures(a)
CPI
+
–
Chart 4.2 Core inflation measures average around 1%
Measures of core CPI inflation
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Swathe includes measures of CPI, adjusted by Bank staff for changes in VAT, excluding: food and
energy; food, non-alcoholic beverages and energy; food, non-alcoholic beverages, alcohol, energy and
tobacco; food, non-alcoholic beverages, alcohol, energy, tobacco and education. It also includes the
weighted median inflation rate of the 85 CPI sub-components and a measure where component
weights in CPI are multiplied by the inverse of the past volatility of that component. Where series have
been adjusted for VAT there is uncertainty around the precise impact of the changes in the rate of VAT.
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
135
150
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2007 09 11 13 15 17
Pence per therm £ per barrel

August 2015 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
November 2015 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
Gas(b)
 (left-hand scale)
Oil(a) (right-hand scale)
Chart 4.4 Wholesale energy prices have fallen since August
Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time converted into sterling.
(b) One-day forward price of UK natural gas.
(c) Averages during the fifteen working days to 29 July 2015 and 28 October 2015 respectively.
26 Inflation Report November 2015
using the goods import price index weighted together with the
service imports deflator to assess changes in UK import prices.
According to those estimates, import prices for goods and
services excluding fuel and erratic factors(1) have fallen by
around 3% over the past two years, a somewhat smaller
fall than implied by the data available at the time of the
August Report. Due to the greater-than-usual uncertainty
around those data, the revisions have not been allowed to
affect the MPC’s projections (Section 5).
Notwithstanding the recent revisions, the fall in UK import
prices has been smaller than might have been expected given
the appreciation in sterling. As explained in the box on
pages 28–29, on average, around 60% of any change in
sterling foreign export prices is reflected in UK import prices.
But that relationship is highly uncertain and can vary
considerably over time. In the August Report, the MPC noted
that import prices had not fallen as much as expected
following sterling’s appreciation up until the spring, and
judged it unlikely that that appreciation would give rise to any
further decline in import prices. In the run-up to the
November Report, the sterling ERI was at a similar level to that
in the spring (Section 1).
The falls in import prices since 2013 will have been an
important factor weighing on CPI inflation and measures of
core inflation (Section 4.1). As explained in the box on
pages 28–29, the scale and timing of the pass-through of
import prices to consumer prices is highly uncertain. Changes
in import prices are likely to affect the prices of goods more
than services, due to the higher imported content of goods in
the CPI basket. Indicators of near-term cost and pricing
pressures in the manufacturing sector, which are a leading
indicator of consumer goods prices and will in part reflect
imported price pressures, remain muted.(2) The MPC’s best
collective judgement is that the drag from import prices on
CPI inflation will be protracted and diminish only gradually
over the forecast period, such that the drag from the past falls
in import prices is likely still to be affecting inflation in
two years’ time (Section 5).
4.3 Domestic cost pressures
In addition to imported costs, domestic cost pressures, in
particular unit labour costs, are a key driver of CPI inflation. In
the four quarters to 2015 Q2, whole-economy unit labour
cost growth picked up to 1.8% (Chart 4.6), from around -1%
during 2014, according to a measure using National Accounts
compensation data and the MPC’s backcast for GDP growth.
Some of this rise reflects faster wage growth relative to
productivity (Section 3). Growth of self-employment income
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage points
Non-wage labour costs per head Productivity
Wages, salaries and self-employment
 income per head(b) Unit labour costs (per cent)
+
–
Chart 4.6 Unit labour cost growth projected to rise
further in Q3
Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy unit labour cost
growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Unit labour costs are calculated as total labour costs divided by GDP, based on the backcast
of the final estimate of GDP. Estimates are consistent with Bank staff’s assumption for
population growth, as explained in the May Report. The diamond shows Bank staff’s
projection for 2015 Q3.
(b) Self-employment income is calculated from mixed income, assuming that the share of
employment income in that is the same as the share of employee compensation in nominal
GDP less mixed income.
(1) The ONS defines erratic factors as ships, aircraft, precious stones, silver and
non-monetary gold.
(2) For a broader discussion of indicators of supply chain pricing pressures see
pages 29–31 of the August Report; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/inflationreport/2015/aug.pdf.
40
20
0
20
40
60
80
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16
Contribution at time of November 2015 Report(c) (right-hand scale)
Sterling oil prices(b) (left-hand scale)
£ per barrel Percentage points
Change since August 2015 Report (right-hand scale)
Contribution at time of August 2015 Report(a) (right-hand scale)
+
– +
–
Projection
Chart 4.5 Fuel prices projected to drag on inflation for
longer than in the August Report
Sterling oil prices and contribution of fuels to CPI inflation
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Department of Energy and Climate Change, ONS,
Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Bank staff estimates. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department of Energy and
Climate Change petrol price data for July 2015 and are then based on the August 2015
sterling oil futures curve shown in Chart 4.3 of the August Report.
(b) Monthly averages of the oil price data and futures curve shown in Chart 4.4.
(c) Bank staff estimates. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department of Energy and
Climate Change petrol price data for October 2015 and are then based on the sterling oil
futures curve shown in the chart.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 27
and non-wage costs also picked up. Unit labour cost growth
is estimated to have risen further in 2015 Q3, to 2.2%, but
is then projected to drop back a little, to around 2%, in
2015 Q4. Beyond that, as wage growth continues to
strengthen following the absorption of slack in the labour
market, unit labour cost growth is projected to pick up further
(Section 5).
The extent to which increases in labour costs put upward
pressure on CPI inflation will depend on businesses’ ability
to pass them through to consumers. In Q2, indicators of
domestically generated inflation remained subdued
(Chart 4.7). Survey indicators of businesses’ capacity
utilisation rates are around, or a little above, their historical
average level (Section 3), which may imply further upward
pressure on businesses’ costs as demand continues to grow.
4.4 Inflation expectations
A key determinant of the persistence of below-target inflation
will be inflation expectations, and the extent to which they
affect households’ and companies’ wage and price-setting
behaviour. The MPC monitors a range of indicators to assess
whether inflation expectations are well anchored.
Movements in households’ short-term inflation expectations
were mixed in Q3 (Table 4.B). The Barclays Basix and
YouGov/Citigroup measures rose slightly, while the Bank/GfK
measure fell a little. Households’ short-term inflation
expectations remain below their historical average. Those
would, however, be expected to move closely with
households’ perceptions of current inflation and the near-term
outlook for inflation, both of which are relatively weak.
Companies’ short-term inflation expectations and measures
derived from financial market instruments remained a little
below their past averages in Q3.
Movements in medium and longer-term measures of inflation
expectations may be more informative when considering
whether expectations remain well anchored. Although
measures of households’ longer-term expectations remained
below their historical averages, some picked up in Q3
(Table 4.B). According to the Deloitte survey, however, the
proportion of chief financial officers reporting that they expect
inflation to be below 1½% in two years’ time increased in Q3
to just under 40%, from around 30% in Q2. Professional
forecasters’ expectations two to three years ahead were
unchanged. Medium and longer-term measures of inflation
expectations derived from financial market prices fell slightly
in Q3, but remained close to their past averages.
Overall, the MPC judges that inflation expectations remain
well anchored. There remains a risk, however, that lower
inflation expectations affect wage and price-setting behaviour,
causing low inflation to be more persistent. The MPC will
continue to monitor inflation expectations closely.
Table 4.B Indicators of inflation expectations(a)
Per cent 2000 (or start
of series) Averages 2013 2014 2015
to 2007 since
averages(b) 2008 H1 H2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4(c)
One year ahead inflation expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK 2.4 3.2 3.5 2.7 2.7 1.9 2.2 2.0 n.a.
Barclays Basix 2.8 2.9 2.8 2.4 2.2 1.7 1.3 1.6 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 2.5 2.5 2.7 2.2 1.9 1.2 1.2 1.5 1.4
Companies (2008 Q2)(e) n.a. 0.5 0.4 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 n.a.
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(f) 2.6 2.7 3.0 2.9 2.8 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.5
Two to three year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK (2009 Q1) n.a. 2.8 3.3 2.7 2.7 2.1 2.3 2.3 n.a.
Barclays Basix 3.2 3.2 3.2 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.7 2.0 n.a.
Professional forecasters
(2006 Q2)(g) 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(h) 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.0 2.9 3.1 3.1 2.9
Five to ten year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank/GfK (2009 Q1) n.a. 3.2 3.6 3.1 3.2 2.8 2.8 2.8 n.a.
Barclays Basix (2008 Q3) n.a. 3.7 3.8 3.7 3.5 3.4 2.8 3.0 n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 3.5 3.3 3.5 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.6 2.7 2.7
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(i) 3.0 3.5 3.5 3.4 3.3 3.1 3.3 3.4 3.3
Memo: CPI inflation 1.6 2.6 2.6 1.7 1.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Bloomberg, CBI (all rights reserved), Citigroup, GfK, ONS, YouGov and
Bank calculations.
(a) Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Dates in parentheses indicate start date of the data series.
(c) Financial markets data are averages from 1 October to 28 October 2015. YouGov/Citigroup data are for
October.
(d) The household surveys ask about expected changes in prices but do not reference a specific price index, and
the measures are based on the median estimated price change.
(e) CBI data for the manufacturing, business/consumer services and distribution sectors, weighted together using
nominal shares in value added. Companies are asked about the expected percentage price change over the
coming twelve months in the markets in which they compete.
(f) Instantaneous RPI inflation one year ahead implied from swaps.
(g) Bank’s survey of external forecasters, inflation rate three years ahead.
(h) Instantaneous RPI inflation three years ahead implied from swaps.
(i) Five-year, five-year forward RPI inflation implied from swaps.
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Range of DGI measures(a)
Average of DGI measures
+
–
Chart 4.7 Domestically generated inflation has picked
up slightly
Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Includes: whole-economy unit labour costs (as defined in footnote (a) of Chart 4.6); private
sector unit wage costs (private sector AWE divided by private sector productivity); the GDP
deflator; the GDP deflator excluding government; and the services producer prices index.
28 Inflation Report November 2015
The effect of imported price pressures on
UK consumer prices
The openness of the UK economy means that inflation can be
sensitive to movements in imported costs. These can stem
from changes in both foreign export prices and the sterling
exchange rate. For example, the depreciation of sterling in
2007–08 and the strength in foreign export prices between
late 2009 and 2012 both contributed to the rise in inflation to
well above the 2% target between late 2009 and 2013;
conversely sterling’s appreciation since March 2013 is a
contributing factor to the current low inflation rate.
In forming its inflation projection, the MPC must make
judgements on the outlook for import prices and how
businesses are likely to pass those through the supply chain to
CPI inflation. The outlook for import prices will, in turn,
depend on how changes in foreign export prices and the
sterling exchange rate are passed through. This box explains
the factors driving the relationship between world export
prices and UK import prices, between UK import prices and
CPI inflation, and the uncertainties around those. It concludes
by setting out the assumptions underlying the MPC’s latest
projections.
The link from world export prices to UK import prices
In order to form a projection for non-energy UK import price
inflation, the MPC takes a view on the outlook for global
pricing pressures and, hence, foreign export prices. That path
for foreign countries’ average export prices is then converted
into sterling according to the conditioning assumption for the
sterling effective exchange rate (ERI), as set out in Section 5.
The degree of pass-through from sterling foreign export prices
to UK import prices, however, varies over time (Chart A).(1)
On average, around 60% of past changes in the Bank’s
measure of sterling foreign export prices have been reflected
in UK import prices, usually within a year. That is broadly
consistent with estimates of exchange rate pass-through in
other countries.(2) At times, such as between 2010 and 2012,
when import prices moved broadly in line with sterling world
export prices, the relationship has been much closer than that.
At other times, including over the past year or so it appears to
have been more moderate. So the MPC has to make a
judgement about how much of any changes in sterling foreign
export prices will be reflected in UK import prices.
A number of factors will influence the extent of pass-through
from sterling foreign export prices to UK import prices. One
factor is the presence of so-called ‘pricing to market’ effects.
For many goods and services, the price foreign exporters
charge is likely to differ across the countries they are selling to.
A measure of aggregate foreign export prices that captures
only the average price at source will not, therefore, necessarily
reflect the prices paid by UK importers. Moreover,
international companies may vary the price of their exports to
a particular country in response to changes in demand there.
Where changes in the exchange rate are themselves driven by
shifts in demand, the presence of pricing to market effects will
affect the extent to which those changes are reflected in
sterling import prices. For example, if strong domestic
demand growth leads to an appreciation in sterling then
foreign exporters may not reduce their sterling prices by as
much as they could in light of the exchange rate rise. This
may help to account for the relatively small falls in UK import
prices since 2014 (Chart A).
UK demand for foreign goods and services will in part reflect
the capacity to produce similar goods and services in the
United Kingdom, and hence supply conditions here. A change
in the exchange rate associated with a change in UK supply
conditions may, therefore, have different effects. For example,
if UK supply growth were to improve, UK businesses may be
able to satisfy more domestic demand and hence demand for
foreign goods and services may grow more slowly. If that
improvement in supply were accompanied by an appreciation
of sterling then foreign exporters may let the downward
pressure on sterling import prices from the appreciation pass
through more fully in an attempt to protect market share.
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Foreign export prices
 in sterling terms(a)
UK import prices(b)
Foreign export prices in foreign currency(c)
+
–
Chart A The degree of pass-through from sterling
foreign export prices to UK import prices varies over time
UK import prices and foreign export prices excluding fuel
Sources: Bank of England, CEIC, Eurostat, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) Domestic currency non-oil export prices of goods and services of 51 countries weighted
according to their shares in UK imports, divided by the sterling effective exchange rate. The
sample does not include any major oil exporters.
(b) As advised by the ONS in the notice released on 2 November 2015, this line shows the price
index for goods excluding oil and erratics, as defined in footnote (1) on page 26, weighted
together with the services import price deflator.
(c) Domestic currency non-oil export prices as defined in footnote (a).
(1) For further discussion about the relationship between world export prices and UK
import prices see Forbes, K, Hjortsoe, I and Nenova, T (2015), ‘The shocks matter:
improving our estimates of exchange rate pass-through’, External MPC Unit Discussion
Paper No. 43.
(2) For example, Campa, J M and Goldberg, L (2005), ‘Exchange-rate pass-through into
import prices’, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87(4), pages 679–90 find
an average pass-through of 64% in a study of 23 countries.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 29
Pricing to market effects are present only for some imports, so
the extent to which import prices move in line with sterling
foreign export prices will depend on which export prices are
changing. Commodities are highly tradable and their prices
are often set in global markets. So, when changes in sterling
foreign export prices are driven mainly by changes in
commodity prices, they may be reflected more fully in
changes in UK import prices. This may help to explain why
import prices moved quite closely in line with sterling foreign
export prices during 2010–13.
Differences between the measure of foreign export prices
used and UK import prices may also affect estimates of
pass-through. A measure of aggregate foreign export
prices will capture the mix of goods and services that are
exported globally but not necessarily the mix of goods and
services imported in the United Kingdom. In addition,
exporters may choose to set their prices in a currency other
than their own or the market they are exporting to. For
example, around 10% of UK imports come from the
United States, but at least 35% of imports are invoiced in
US dollars, significantly greater than the US dollar weight in
the sterling ERI.(1) So a measure of foreign export prices
converted using the sterling ERI may not capture the actual
exchange rates relevant for UK import prices. That will be
particularly relevant when there are large bilateral sterling
exchange rate moves. Indeed, as the appreciation in the
sterling ERI since March 2013 has reflected an appreciation
against the euro but overall little change against the US dollar,
this may be another reason why import prices have fallen by
less than implied by the sterling ERI-based measure of foreign
export prices recently.
Pass-through of UK import prices to consumer prices
The extent to which UK import prices change in response to
moves in foreign export prices or the exchange rate will vary
over time, and will depend on the factors driving the change
and economic conditions. In addition, the pass-through of
those changes in import prices to CPI inflation is uncertain and
will depend on the import content of consumption, the share
of domestically produced goods that are substitutes for
imports and how domestic economic conditions affect
businesses’ pricing decisions. Estimates of the pass-through of
import prices to the CPI suggest that, on average, a 1% fall in
non-energy import prices lowers the level of consumer prices
by a little less than 0.3% (Chart B). Most of that is estimated
to occur over a three-year period, with the peak impact on
inflation after around a year. That appears to be broadly
consistent with a full but gradual pass-through to the CPI of
any change in import prices, given the share of imports in the
CPI: estimates based on the 2010 ONS Supply and Use
Analytical Tables suggest that non-energy imports account for
a little under 30% of the CPI basket.
The extent to which, and how quickly, businesses pass through
changes in import prices, and whether the prices of other
goods and services adjust, will depend on a number of factors.
If consumer demand were relatively robust, businesses may be
quicker to pass through price increases, and slower to pass
through lower prices, than they would be if demand were
weak. Which goods and services prices are changing will also
affect the dynamics of pass-through: goods and services that
require little processing before being purchased by consumers
or that have relatively few substitutes, such as food, are likely
to see quicker pass-through.
The MPC’s current assumptions
There is uncertainty around the extent to which changes in
foreign export prices and the sterling exchange rate will be
reflected in UK consumer prices, and the time those changes
will take to pass through. Taking all the evidence together, the
MPC’s best collective judgement is that on average around
60% of any change in sterling foreign export prices tends to be
reflected in UK import prices, with pass-through completed
within a year, although that will vary depending on the reason
for the change. The MPC also judges that all of the change in
import prices tends to be reflected in the CPI, with almost all
of that change passed through within three years. The impact
will depend crucially on the economic conditions at the time,
and the composition of those changes.
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0 2468 10 12 14 16 18 20
Percentage points Per cent
Contribution to annual CPI inflation
 (left-hand scale)
CPI level impact
 (right-hand scale)
Quarters
– –
Chart B A fall in import prices is likely to weigh on
consumer price inflation for a protracted period
Model-based impact of a 1% change in non-energy import prices
on CPI inflation(a)
(1) Importers are only required to specify the invoicing currency for imports from outside
the EU. To the extent that some imports from within the EU are invoiced in
US dollars then the overall share of the US dollar in imports could be greater.
(a) Results from a simulation of an unexpected shock to the sterling effective exchange rate
such that import prices fall by 1%. For more information about the Bank’s central
forecasting model and range of supporting models see Burgess et al (2013), ‘The Bank of
England’s forecasting platform: COMPASS, MAPS, EASE and the suite of models’, Bank of
England Working Paper No. 471;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2013/wp471.pdf.
30 Inflation Report November 2015
5 Prospects for inflation
CPI inflation has remained close to zero. GDP growth has slowed over the past year to around its
past average rate. A weaker global backdrop together with falls in the prices of risky assets are
weighing on the outlook for UK growth, but they are counterbalanced by support from falls in
market interest rates and commodity prices. Conditioned on a very gently rising path for
Bank Rate, the MPC judges that four-quarter growth is likely to remain around current rates and the
slack remaining in the economy is likely to be absorbed. Recent falls in oil and other commodity
prices mean that inflation is likely to remain lower than previously expected until late 2017 but, on
the conditioning path for Bank Rate, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that CPI inflation will
return to the 2% target in around two years and rise above it thereafter.
Since the August Report, CPI inflation has remained close to
zero, largely reflecting the impact of past falls in the prices of
commodities and other imported goods, but also reflecting
relatively low domestic cost growth.(1) Although the slowing
in UK growth over the past year was broadly in line with
expectations (see the box on pages 42–43), the latest outturns
have been a little weaker than anticipated three months ago.
More notably, the outlook for emerging economies appears
weaker.
The MPC’s projections are conditioned on the asset prices
prevailing in the fifteen working days to 28 October.(2)
Recently, global developments have been associated with
marked movements in asset prices, including those in the
United Kingdom. Since the August Report, the path for
Bank Rate implied by market rates has fallen by around
40 basis points, such that it only reaches 0.75% in 2017 Q2,
compared with 2016 Q3 in August, and is just 1¼% by the end
of 2018 (Table 5.A). There is uncertainty, however, about the
extent to which the fall since August reflects changes in
market participants’ expectations about the most likely path
for Bank Rate: some of the fall in market yields may reflect
increased concerns about downside risks. The sterling ERI has
(1) The reasons why inflation remains well below the 2% target and the MPC’s response
are set out in the Governor’s letter to the Chancellor;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/cpiletter051115.pdf.
(2) Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on:
Bank Rate following a path implied by market yields; a constant stock of asset
purchases; the Recommendations of the Financial Policy Committee and the current
regulatory plans of the Prudential Regulation Authority; the Government’s tax and
spending plans as set out in the Summer Budget 2015; commodity prices following
market paths; and the sterling exchange rate remaining broadly stable. The main
assumptions are set out in a table at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Documents/inflationreport/2015/novca.pdf. In the days after the MPC finalised its
projections the market-implied path for UK interest rates rose by around
15 basis points, reversing part of the fall since August. The sterling ERI prevailing
immediately before the MPC’s decision was nearly 2% higher than the rate used in
these projections.
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
ONS data
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. To the left of the
vertical dashed line, the distribution reflects the likelihood of revisions to the data over the past;
to the right, it reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If economic
circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective
judgement is that the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within the darkest central band
on only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to
lie within each pair of the lighter green areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the
forecast period, GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of
100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP growth can fall anywhere
outside the green area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the
light grey background. See the box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a
fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
Chart 5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
Table 5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates(a)
Per cent
 2015 2016 2017 2018
 Q4(b) Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
November 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.3
August 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.7
(a) The data are fifteen working day averages of one-day forward rates to 28 October 2015 and 29 July 2015
respectively. The curve is based on overnight index swap rates.
(b) November figure for 2015 Q4 is an average of realised spot rates to 28 October 2015, and forward rates
thereafter.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 31
fallen by 2% and the FTSE All-Share is 4% lower, largely
reflecting global influences (Section 1).
By themselves, weaker global activity and associated falls in
risky asset prices are expected to weigh on the outlook for
UK GDP and inflation, but a lower level of sterling and the
lower path for Bank Rate support it. The MPC’s latest
projections for growth and inflation (Charts 5.1 and 5.2) are
therefore broadly similar to those in the August Report in the
medium term, although inflation is a little higher by the
three-year point (Chart 5.4).
Under the conditioning assumptions of a very gradual rise in
Bank Rate and that the stock of purchased assets remains at
£375 billion, UK private domestic demand grows at
above-average rates, such that four-quarter GDP growth
remains around 2½% over the forecast period, despite
below-average global growth and the continuing fiscal
consolidation. GDP is judged likely to grow slightly faster than
the economy’s supply capacity so the remaining slack in the
economy is absorbed and a small margin of excess demand
opens up. CPI inflation is likely to remain below 1% until the
second half of 2016, however, reflecting the continuing drag
from commodity and other imported goods prices.
Thereafter, that drag dissipates and, conditioned on the
market path, building domestic cost pressures are projected
to take CPI inflation back to the 2% target in the second half
of 2017 and above it in 2018 (Chart 5.4). Considerable
uncertainty surrounds these projections. As in August, the
risks to the GDP outlook are weighted to the downside,
reflecting risks from the rest of the world. In part reflecting
those downside risks to global activity, there is a downside
skew to the CPI inflation projection in the first two years,
albeit diminishing in the second year, but the risks are judged
to be broadly balanced by the three-year horizon.
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
18
Chart 5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest
rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.3 CPI inflation projection in August based on
market interest rate expectations and £375 billion
purchased assets
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 depict the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. They have been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves
remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie
within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan charts are constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter red areas on 30 occasions. In any particular
quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall anywhere outside the red area of the
fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the light grey background. See the box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
Probability of inflation at or below
the target, inverted (per cent)
Probability of inflation
above the target (per cent)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0 100
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
November
August
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2015 16 17 18
Chart 5.4 Inflation probabilities relative to the target
The November and August swathes in this chart are derived from the same distributions as
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 respectively. They indicate the assessed probability of inflation relative to
the target in each quarter of the forecast period. The 5 percentage points width of the swathes
reflects the fact that there is uncertainty about the precise probability in any given quarter, but
they should not be interpreted as confidence intervals.
32 Inflation Report November 2015
In light of the economic outlook, at its meeting ending on
4 November the MPC voted to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5%
and the stock of purchased assets at £375 billion. The factors
behind that decision are set out in the Monetary Policy
Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail in the
minutes of the meeting.(1) A box on page 34 sets out the
MPC’s current expectations about the stock of purchased
assets as Bank Rate rises.
5.1 Key judgements and risks
The shape of the Committee’s projections reflects four key
judgements and the risks around them. Table 5.B provides
projections for variables that illustrate those judgements;
Table 5.C provides a range of indicators to monitor them; and
Table 5.D shows indicative projections for a range of other
variables.
Key Judgement 1: global growth remains well below past
average rates as emerging-economy growth recovers only a
little from current weak rates and advanced-economy
growth remains modest
Having supported global activity in the aftermath of the
financial crisis, growth in emerging economies has weakened
in recent years and has consistently undershot projections. In
China, concerns about growth prompted the authorities to
introduce further policy stimulus, including increased fiscal
spending and cuts in official interest rates. In part reflecting
past policy actions, the official estimate of annual growth in
China remained robust in Q3, albeit lower than seen in recent
years, at 6.9%. In the central projection, growth slows a little
more than assumed in August, to around 6%. In addition,
emerging economies other than China are projected to grow
by less than 3% in 2015, down from around 6% in 2010, with
output having fallen materially in some countries where global
headwinds have been exacerbated by domestic challenges,
including Brazil and Russia. Further out, growth is judged likely
to recover slowly, but the pattern of relatively weak growth
over several years has led the Committee to reappraise the
medium-term growth rates for these economies, which are
now projected to be lower than in previous Reports.
Revisions to the outlook for emerging economies by
themselves account for the majority of the downgrade to
world growth relative to three months ago. The weakness in
emerging economies also has implications for advanced
economies through both trade and financial channels.
Risk-free rates have fallen in advanced economies, helping
support activity. Although those falls by themselves would
tend to push up the prices of risky assets, equity prices are
lower and corporate bond yields higher than three months
ago, weighing on growth.
(1) The minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2015/nov.pdf.
Table 5.B MPC key judgements(a)(b)
Key Judgement 1: global growth remains well below past average rates as
emerging-economy growth recovers only a little from current weak rates and
advanced-economy growth remains modest
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
World GDP (UK-weighted)(c) 3 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2¾) 2½ (2¾) 2¼
World GDP (PPP-weighted)(d) 4 3 (3¼) 3¼ (3¾) 3¼ (3½) 3¼
Euro-area GDP(e) 2¼ 1½ (1½) 1¾ (1¾) 1¾ (1¾) 1½
US GDP(f) 3 2½ (2½) 2½ (2¾) 2¼ (2¼) 2
Dollar oil prices(g) 39 49 (57) 56 (62) 59 (66) 62
Key Judgement 2: domestically, productivity growth supports supply as the growth in
labour supply slows
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
Productivity(h) 2¼ 1¼ (1) 1 (1) 1½ (1½) 1¾
Participation rate(i) 63 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½) 63½
Average hours(j) 32¼ 32 (32¼) 32¼ (32½) 32¼ (32¼) 32¼
Key Judgement 3: UK private demand remains resilient in the face of developments
abroad and the continuing fiscal consolidation at home
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
Credit spreads(k) ¾(l) 2¼ (2) 2 (2) 2 (2) 2
Household saving ratio(m) 8¾ 4¾ (5¼) 4 (5) 3¼ (4½) 2¾
Business investment
to GDP ratio(n) 9¾ 9¾ (10¾) 10¼ (11¼) 10¾ (12) 11¼
Key Judgement 4: the drag on CPI inflation from external factors gradually dissipates
and wage and domestic cost growth strengthen
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
UK import prices(o) ¼ -4¾ (-5½) ¾ (¾) 1 (¾) 1
Unit labour costs(p) 3 2 (2) 2¾ (3) 2¾ (3) 2¾
Sources: Bank of England, BDRC Continental SME Finance Monitor, Bloomberg, BofA Merrill Lynch Global
Research, British Household Panel Survey, Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Eurostat, IMF World
Economic Outlook (WEO), ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) The MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts) are
underpinned by four key judgements. The mapping from the key judgements to individual variables is not
precise, but the profiles in the table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s key judgements.
(b) Figures show calendar-year growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the August 2015 Inflation Report, which were only available to 2017.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 146 countries weighted according
to their shares in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 147 countries weighted according
to their shares in world GDP using the IMF's purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e) Chained-volume measure.
(f) Chained-volume measure.
(g) Average level in Q4. Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices.
(h) GDP per hour worked. GDP at market prices is based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Hours worked
are based on Bank staff’s assumption for population growth, as explained in the May 2015 Report.
(i) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population.
(j) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job.
(k) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(l) Based on the weighted average of spreads for households and large companies over 2003 and 2004 relative
to the level in 2007 Q3. Data used to construct the SME spread are not available for that period. The
period is chosen as broadly representative of one where spreads were neither unusually tight nor unusually
loose.
(m) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources.
(n) Calendar-year average. Chained-volume business investment as a percentage of GDP.
(o) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4. Excludes the impact of missing trader intra-community fraud.
(p) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at
market prices, based on the mode of the MPC's GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation
of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 33
Commodity prices have also fallen. Since the August Report,
the price of Brent crude oil has declined by 14%, to US$48 a
barrel. While that appears to reflect weaker demand prospects,
particularly in emerging economies, it should support real
income and hence spending in commodity-importing countries,
including in some advanced economies.
Taken together the net effect on advanced economies of
emerging-economy weakness is judged to be broadly neutral:
the growth outlooks in the euro area and United States are
little changed (Table 5.B). In the euro area, annual growth has
picked up in 2015 and is projected to remain close to 1½%,
supported by lower energy prices, improvements in credit
conditions, the ECB’s asset purchase programme and the past
depreciation of the euro. Growth remains below past average
The Committee’s projections are underpinned by four key
judgements. Risks surround all of these, and the MPC will
monitor a broad range of variables to understand the degree
to which the risks are crystallising. The table below shows
Bank staff’s indicative near-term projections that are
consistent with the judgements in the MPC’s central view
evolving as expected.
Table 5.C Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements
Key judgement Likely developments in 2015 Q4 to 2016 Q2 if judgements evolve as expected
1: global growth remains well
below past average rates as
emerging-economy growth
recovers only a little from
current weak rates and
advanced-economy growth
remains modest
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average a little below ½%.
• Euro-area HICP inflation is expected to pick up in the coming months, and to average around 1% in
2016 H1.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a little above ½%.
• US PCE inflation remains weak in the coming months, but picks up to around 1¼% in 2016 H1.
• Indicators of activity consistent with four-quarter PPP-weighted emerging-economy growth of
around 4%; within that, Chinese GDP growth to average around 6½%.
2: domestically, productivity
growth supports supply as the
growth in labour supply slows
• Participation rate to pick up slightly by the middle of next year to a little under 63½%.
• Headline LFS unemployment to fall slightly to 5.3% by the middle of next year.
• Average hours to increase by around ½% by the middle of next year.
• Quarterly hourly labour productivity to grow at an average pace of slightly below ¼%.
• Indicators of capacity utilisation within firms to ease back slightly by the middle of next year.
3: UK private demand remains
resilient in the face of
developments abroad and the
continuing fiscal consolidation
at home
• Quarterly consumption growth of around ¾%.
• Saving ratio of around 3¾% by 2016 Q2.
• Quarterly business investment growth to average above 1½%.
• Credit spreads rise slightly in 2015 Q4, and then fall back.
• A rise in mortgage approvals for house purchase to 74,000 a month, on average, in 2016 Q1.
• Rates of increase in the main indices of national house prices to average around ½% per month.
• Quarterly housing investment growth to average around 1%.
4: the drag on CPI inflation
from external factors gradually
dissipates and wage and
domestic cost growth
strengthen
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to evolve in line with the conditioning assumptions set out in
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/novca.pdf.
• Domestic gas prices to fall by 5% by next spring. Domestic electricity prices to remain flat.
• Four-quarter AWE growth to temporarily dip to 2½% in Q4 due to volatility in bonuses a year earlier,
before picking up to 3¼% by the middle of next year.
• Four-quarter growth in whole-economy unit labour costs to reach 2¼% by Q1 next year.
• Import prices expected to remain little changed in 2016 H1.
• Indicators of inflation expectations continue to be broadly consistent with the 2% target.
The MPC’s asset purchases as Bank Rate rises
After cutting Bank Rate to 0.5% during 2008–09, the MPC
loosened monetary policy further by conducting a total of
£375 billion of asset purchases during 2009–12. Since then,
the MPC has maintained Bank Rate at 0.5% and the stock of
purchased assets at £375 billion by reinvesting in new assets
the cash flows associated with maturing assets. And in
February 2014, the MPC also provided guidance that, given the
likely persistence of the headwinds restraining economic
growth following the financial crisis, when the MPC does begin
to raise Bank Rate it expects to do so gradually and to a lower
level than in previous cycles.
The date at which the MPC judges it appropriate to adjust the
stance of monetary policy will depend on the outlook for
inflation in the United Kingdom. As and when the time comes
for a tightening of monetary policy, the MPC will have two
tools it could use: the Committee will be able to tighten
monetary policy either by raising Bank Rate or by reducing the
stock of purchased assets.
As set out in the box on page 41 of the May 2014 Report, the
MPC’s preference is to use Bank Rate as the active marginal
instrument for monetary policy, given its greater flexibility as
a policy tool. Given that preference, and in order to have the
scope to adjust policy sufficiently in either direction should
that be required, the MPC expects to maintain the stock of
purchased assets at £375 billion until Bank Rate has reached
a level from which it can be cut materially. The MPC views
sales and reinvestment decisions as equivalent from a
monetary policy perspective. The Committee therefore
expects to continue to reinvest maturing assets until
Bank Rate has reached such a level.
The level of Bank Rate that would give the MPC sufficient
scope to cut it materially, should that be necessary, depends
on a range of factors that are likely to vary over time. Those
include the likely size of the shocks to which the economy is
exposed and the likely impact of policy changes. Based on
historical experiences, the MPC currently judges that such a
level of Bank Rate is around 2%. It follows that the MPC’s
current expectation is that it is unlikely to reduce the stock of
purchased assets from its current level of £375 billion until
Bank Rate is around 2%. Decisions about the stock of
purchased assets will, however, reflect the economic
circumstances at the time.
Any reduction in the stock of purchased assets will be
conducted in an orderly manner over a period of time so as
not to disrupt the gilt market. So, while any reduction will be
solely a decision for the MPC based on meeting its objectives,
the Bank will liaise with the Debt Management Office when
implementing any change in its asset purchase programme.
The MPC will continue to monitor the factors affecting these
judgements and will revisit them accordingly.
34 Inflation Report November 2015
rates, however, reflecting the continuing challenge of reducing
debt and weaker potential growth, in part due to demographic
trends in some countries. In the United States, inflation has
remained low, largely reflecting lower prices for energy, food
and other goods. GDP growth appears to have been a little
stronger in the first half of 2015 than previously thought, but
indicators for the second half of the year have softened.
Four-quarter growth is projected to remain below past average
rates (Table 5.B) assuming the federal funds rate follows
the path implied by market interest rates that rises from
2016 Q2.
Despite emerging economies’ relatively low share in
UK exports, the revisions to growth are large enough to have
lowered UK-weighted world growth relative to expectations
three months ago. Annual UK-weighted world growth
remains around 2¼% in 2015, rising to 2½% in 2017, well
below past average rates (Chart 5.5). Moreover, the risks to
that projection continue to lie to the downside. There remain
risks from China as the authorities attempt to rebalance
demand towards domestic consumption and liberalise the
financial system. As discussed in a box on page 2, a sharper
slowdown in China would weigh on UK growth through trade,
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 35
confidence and financial market channels, although these
could be partly offset by any associated falls in commodity
prices. More broadly, many emerging economies remain
under strain, not least in the face of prospective rises in
US interest rates, which could lead to further capital outflows
from some countries and increased costs of servicing
dollar-denominated debt. Those downside risks to the global
outlook feed through to a downside skew to the UK growth
outlook over the three years of the forecast period, and a
downside skew to inflation in the first two years.
Below-average global growth, together with the rise in the
sterling exchange rate since 2013, means that UK export
growth is projected to remain well below past average rates
(Table 5.D). Import growth is a little stronger (Table 5.D),
such that net trade subtracts around ½ percentage point from
annual growth on average over the forecast period. The
contrast between external and domestic demand is also
apparent in the current account deficit: within that, the trade
deficit is assumed to reverse its recent narrowing and the
income balance to remain in significant deficit.
Key Judgement 2: domestically, productivity growth
supports supply as the growth in labour supply slows
Over the past few years UK demand is judged to have grown
faster than potential supply, reducing the degree of slack in
the economy. The MPC’s best collective judgement is that
spare capacity of around ½% of GDP remains, although there
is a wide degree of uncertainty around that estimate and a
range of views on the Committee. With limited slack
remaining, the extent to which demand can grow without
generating inflationary pressures will depend on how quickly
supply capacity expands and how rapidly any pressure on
supply feeds into wage and price inflation.
Potential supply growth in recent years has been
disproportionately accounted for by an expansion in the
supply of labour. That in part reflected a shift towards longer
working hours, as well as a decline in the medium-term
equilibrium unemployment rate (Section 3). Over the
forecast period, medium-term equilibrium average hours,
unemployment and participation are assumed to change little,
so underlying growth in labour supply returns to more
normal rates.
By contrast, growth in output per hour worked — productivity
— has been subdued during most of the post-crisis period.
Over the past year or so, however, productivity growth has
picked up: output per hour rose 1½% in the year to Q2.
Some of that recent strength is judged to be temporary:
productivity has repeatedly surprised to the downside and
surveys currently suggest that companies are working slightly
above normal capacity and that they expect to expand
recruitment further to meet demand, consistent with a
temporary boost to productivity. Annual productivity growth
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5 Percentage change on previous year
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Projection at the time of the August Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements
 in November
+
–
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth
rates of 146 countries weighted according to their shares in UK exports. Projections were
only available to 2017 at the time of the August Report.
Chart 5.5 World GDP (UK-weighted)(a)
36 Inflation Report November 2015
therefore slows a little in the near term, as companies expand
capacity to meet demand, before rising to 1¾% by the end of
the forecast period (Chart 5.6).
The outlook for supply remains uncertain. Labour supply
could grow more slowly. In recent quarters there have been
signs that people’s desired working hours are falling back,
perhaps because real incomes have strengthened. If that trend
continues it would, by itself, suggest slightly weaker supply
growth. That could be offset, however, if more of the recent
strength in productivity is structural rather than cyclical.
Overall, the risks around the profile for potential supply
growth are judged to be broadly balanced.
Key Judgement 3: UK private demand remains resilient in
the face of developments abroad and the continuing fiscal
consolidation at home
Private final domestic demand has grown by 3% over the
past year; within that consumption growth has strengthened
while investment growth has softened (Section 2). Given the
weak global backdrop, domestic spending will depend in large
part on the prospects for domestic income. In 2015,
households’ real income is projected to grow by 3%
(Table 5.D), the strongest annual rate since 2007. Over
the forecast, the projected strengthening in underlying
productivity growth, past reductions in labour market slack
and recent falls in commodity prices mean real incomes are
projected to grow faster over the next three years than over
the past three, although at only 2¼%, below past average
rates, due to modest productivity growth and the fiscal
consolidation. Households’ and companies’ spending will
also depend on factors such as economic uncertainty, credit
conditions and financial wealth, all of which may be affected
by external events.
Measures of uncertainty have fallen back materially since the
height of the financial crisis. Since the August Report,
however, there are signs that uncertainty may have risen a
little (Section 2). The central projection therefore builds in a
small near-term drag on domestic demand from greater
uncertainty, as some companies put investment plans on hold
and some households delay purchases. That is assumed to be
short-lived although uncertainty could weigh on spending for
longer.
Recently there has been a small widening in banks’ funding
spreads (Section 1), which would tend to push up the cost of
borrowing. There have also, however, been signs of
intensifying competition among lenders apparent, for
example, in a narrowing gap between rates on high and low
loan to value mortgages. The net of these means that the
MPC’s November projections are conditioned on only slightly
wider credit spreads this year than three months ago and
broadly similar spreads further out (Table 5.B). Overall, past
improvements in credit conditions, as seen in sharp falls in
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Projection at the time of the August Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements
 in November Percentage change on previous year
+
–
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. GDP per hour worked. GDP is at market prices and projections
are based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Hours worked are based on Bank staff’s
assumption for population growth, as explained in the May 2015 Report. Projections were
only available to 2017 at the time of the August Report.
Chart 5.6 Productivity(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 37
mortgage rates to historically low levels (Section 2), continue
to support consumption and housing investment growth
throughout the projection. Funding costs and hence loan rates
are likely to remain sensitive to global developments.
The outlook for domestic demand also depends on financial
conditions more broadly. In the central projection, the path
for Bank Rate rises very gradually, and is significantly lower
than three months ago, suggesting more support to spending.
Acting in the other direction, however, the prices of risky
assets have fallen, reducing household wealth and increasing
the cost of capital. Taking these together, there is judged to
be only a little more support to spending from wealth and
interest rates than assumed three months ago.
Taking all the influences on domestic spending together, the
outlook is broadly similar to that in August. In the central
projection, four-quarter private final domestic demand growth
picks up to around 4%, above pre-crisis average rates, before
slowing to around 3½% by the end of the forecast period.
Within that, household consumption grows at around 3%
(Table 5.D) funded through both income growth and a
continuing fall in saving. The household saving ratio falls
to just under 3% in 2018 from its currently estimated rate
of 4¾% in 2015 Q2. Housing investment grows at around 5%
a year (Table 5.D), as house building expands and housing
transactions continue to recover. Annual house price inflation
is projected to rise slightly in the near term before dropping
back to 6%. Business investment grows strongly, with
four-quarter growth peaking at over 9% in the middle of the
forecast period before easing back (Table 5.D) so investment
growth is weaker than in August in the third year of the
projection. As in August, overall domestic demand grows
more slowly than private demand, given the continuing fiscal
consolidation.
The overall risks to the domestic spending profile are judged to
be broadly balanced. The path for income and hence domestic
spending will depend in large part on developments in
productivity (Key Judgement 2). On the downside, households
may be unwilling to reduce saving to the extent assumed in
the central case, even if Bank Rate follows the market path.
The risks to business investment may lie to the upside: the
level of investment is lower than in August, largely reflecting
downward revisions in the data (Section 2). There is a range of
views on the Committee around the outlook for domestic
spending and the risks around it.
Key Judgement 4: the drag on CPI inflation from external
factors gradually dissipates and wage and domestic cost
growth strengthen
The recent weakness in inflation has largely reflected
persistent downward pressure from commodity prices, world
export prices and the sterling exchange rate. Since August,
commodity prices have fallen further but a lower sterling ERI is
Table 5.D Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections(a)
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2015 2016 2017 2018
Household consumption(b) 3¾ 3 (3¼) 3 (3¼) 3 (3) 2¾
Business investment(c) 2½ 5½ (4¾) 7½ (7¼) 8¾ (8½) 7¾
Housing investment(d) 3½ ¼ (6½) 4½ (4½) 5¾ (4) 4¾
Exports(e) 4½ 3¾ (5½) 2½ (2½) 1¾ (2½) 2½
Imports(f) 6 3 (4) 3¾ (3¼) 3¼ (4) 3¼
Real post-tax household income(g) 3 3 (2½) 2¼ (3) 2¼ (2½) 2¼
Employment(h) 1 1½ (1¼) 1 (1¼) 1 (1) ¾
Average weekly earnings(i) 4¼ 2½ (3) 3¾ (3¾) 4 (4¼) 4¼
(a) These projections are produced by Bank staff for the MPC to be consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment. Figures show calendar-year growth
rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the
August 2015 Inflation Report, which were only available to 2017.
(b) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Chained-volume measure.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending
on services associated with the sale and purchase of property.
(e) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra-community
(MTIC) fraud. Official MTIC-adjusted data are not available for exports, so headline exports data have been
adjusted by Bank staff for MTIC fraud by an amount equal to the ONS import adjustment.
(f) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of MTIC fraud.
(g) Total available household resources deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(h) Four-quarter growth rate in Q4. Data have been adjusted for Bank staff’s assumption for population
growth as explained in the May 2015 Report.
(i) Four-quarter growth in Q4 in whole-economy total pay. 
38 Inflation Report November 2015
likely to support import prices. Lower oil prices, together with
slightly weaker-than-expected outturns for CPI inflation since
August (Section 4), have reduced the near-term profile for
inflation by around ¼ percentage point. Moreover, falls in the
gas futures curve mean that small cuts to domestic energy
bills are expected not only in the near term, as assumed in
August, but also later in 2016. It now seems more likely than
not that inflation will remain below 1% until the second half
of 2016, much later than judged likely when inflation first fell
below 1% at the start of 2015. That further revision illustrates
the risks to UK inflation from movements in commodity
prices.
Since August, the sterling ERI has fallen by 2%, taking it close
to its level in the spring. That pushes up import prices
(Table 5.B), but overall, import prices are still dragging on
CPI inflation for much of the forecast period. The dampening
impact of the appreciation of sterling that began in
Spring 2013 is expected to diminish only gradually over the
MPC’s forecast period and is still likely to be affecting inflation
in two years’ time. There remains considerable uncertainty
about how much and how quickly moves in the exchange rate
feed through to CPI inflation: a box on pages 28–29 sets out
the MPC’s latest assumptions.
In the central projection, as external pressures fade,
CPI inflation is projected to pick up over the next year or so.
That relies on there being few spillovers from the period of low
inflation. Some measures of inflation expectations, especially
those of households, remain below past averages and the
latest Deloitte CFO Survey suggested a shift down in the
distribution of large companies’ expectations (Section 4).
Measures derived from financial market prices five years ahead
remain close to their past averages. In the MPC’s projections,
inflation expectations are assumed to remain well anchored.
The medium-term projection for inflation also rests on the
path for domestic cost growth and in particular labour costs.
Wage growth has picked up over the past year — reflecting the
past reduction in labour market slack and the rise in
productivity growth — but it remains below past average
rates. Unit labour cost growth, which adjusts for productivity,
remains below rates consistent with meeting the inflation
target in a sustainable manner. The speed at which labour
costs rise will depend on how easily companies can attract and
retain suitable staff in a tightening labour market. A recent
survey by the Bank’s Agents suggested that companies are
finding it harder to recruit and keep staff. That was likely to
put upward pressure on the pay for some individuals and in
some sectors, although not yet across the board.
In the central projection, demand grows slightly faster than
supply capacity, unemployment falls a little below 5%, its
estimated long-run equilibrium rate, and cost pressures build
further. By the end of the forecast period, annual pay growth
November
August
0
1
2
3
4 Probability density, per cent(b)
1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 +–
(a) Chart 5.8 represents the cross-section of the GDP growth fan chart in 2017 Q4 for the
market interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of
purchased assets remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands in Chart 5.8 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like the fan
charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey outline
represents the corresponding cross-section of the August 2015 Inflation Report fan chart,
which was conditioned on market interest rates and the same assumption about the stock of
purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
growth being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given growth rate, specified to
one decimal place.
Chart 5.8 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in
2017 Q4 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Percentage change on a year earlier
+
–
Projection at the time of the August Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements
 in November
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at market prices, based on the mode of
the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation of employees and the
labour share multiplied by mixed income. The chart shows data to 2015 Q2 and projections
for four-quarter growth in Q4 thereafter. Projections were only available to 2017 at the time
of the August Report.
Chart 5.7 Unit labour costs(a)
Table 5.E Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths(a)
 Mode Median Mean
2015(b) 2.7 (2.8) 2.7 (2.8) 2.7 (2.8)
2016 2.5 (2.7) 2.5 (2.6) 2.5 (2.6)
2017 2.7 (2.6) 2.6 (2.5) 2.6 (2.5)
2018 2.6 2.5 2.5
(a) The table shows the projections for calendar-year growth of real GDP consistent with the modal, median
and mean projections for four-quarter growth of real GDP implied by the fan chart. Where growth rates
depend in part on the MPC’s backcast, revisions to quarterly growth are assumed to be independent of the
revisions to previous quarters. The figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the
August Inflation Report, which were only available to 2017. The November and August projections have
been conditioned on market interest rates, and the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed
by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period.
(b) The anticipated revisions to recent estimates of quarterly GDP growth have implications for calendar-year
growth in 2015. Without the anticipated revisions to past GDP growth, the modal path of the Committee’s
November projections would imply calendar-year growth of 2.4% in 2015 rather than 2.7%.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 39
reaches 4¼% (Table 5.D). That pickup in pay in part reflects
the strengthening in productivity but unit cost growth is
projected to reach 2¾% (Chart 5.7), around its average rate.
There are risks around those paths in both directions. On the
downside, the period of low inflation may be reflected in
weaker wage pressures, especially in the near term. On the
upside, the tightening in the labour market could result in
greater pressure on pay as companies find it increasingly
difficult to source suitable staff.
5.2 The projections for demand,
unemployment and inflation
Based on these judgements and the risks around them, and
under the conditioning path for Bank Rate based on market
yields, which rises to 1.3% by 2018 Q4, the Committee judges
that four-quarter GDP growth is likely to remain around 2½%
(Table 5.E). Over the forecast period, conditioned on that
very gradually rising path for Bank Rate, growth is supported
by robust private spending, particularly housing and business
investment, against a very modest global backdrop and a
further fiscal consolidation. The MPC judges the risks to the
projection to be weighted moderately to the downside
throughout the forecast period (Chart 5.8), reflecting the
possibility of an even weaker global outlook. Overall, the
projection is broadly similar to that of three months ago, as a
weaker outlook for emerging economies and the associated
drag from falls in asset prices has been offset by the lower
path for Bank Rate and the sterling ERI.
The MPC’s projections are underpinned by a sustained return
closer to pre-crisis rates of productivity growth. That is
associated with slowing employment growth and a modest
further fall in unemployment to below the assumed
longer-term equilibrium rate of around 5% (Chart 5.9).
Overall, slack is projected to be absorbed and a small margin
of excess demand to open up by the end of the forecast
period. There remains considerable uncertainty, and a range
of views among MPC members, about the current degree of
slack and how quickly it is likely to be absorbed.
CPI inflation is judged likely to remain close to zero in the near
term, before rising around the turn of the year as past falls in
energy prices drop out of the annual comparison and core
inflation strengthens. In the MPC’s best collective judgement,
inflation is expected to rise gradually thereafter, reaching the
2% target in around two years and then rising above it
(Table 5.F). That gradual rise reflects building domestic cost
pressures and the waning drag from the past appreciation of
sterling, but there remains uncertainty around both those
factors. Overall, the projection is lower than that three
months ago until late 2017 (Chart 5.4), largely reflecting falls
in energy prices, and a touch higher further out. The MPC
judges that the risks to the projection lie to the downside in
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Unemployment rate, per cent
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands have the same interpretation as in Chart 5.2, and portray 90% of the probability
distribution. The calibration of this fan chart takes account of the likely path dependency of the
economy, where, for example, it is judged that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will
continue to have some effect on unemployment in successive quarters. The fan begins in
2015 Q3, a quarter earlier than the fan for CPI inflation. That is because Q3 is a staff projection
for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for July and August. The unemployment rate
was 5.4% in the three months to August, and is projected to be 5.4% in Q3 as a whole. In the
later part of the forecast period, a significant proportion of this distribution lies below
Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. There is
therefore uncertainty about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Chart 5.9 Unemployment projection based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
Table 5.F Q4 CPI inflation
 Mode Median Mean
2015 Q4 0.1(0.4) 0.1 (0.3) 0.1(0.3)
2016 Q4 1.2 (1.6) 1.2 (1.5) 1.1 (1.5)
2017 Q4 2.1 (2.1) 2.0 (2.1) 2.0 (2.1)
2018 Q4 2.2 2.2 2.2
The table shows projections for Q4 four-quarter CPI inflation. The figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the August Inflation Report, which were only available to 2017. The November and
August projections have been conditioned on market interest rates, and the assumption that the stock of
purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the
forecast period.
+– 0
1
2
3
4
1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0
Probability density, per cent(b)
November
August
Chart 5.10 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in
2016 Q4 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
(a) Chart 5.10 represents the cross-section of the CPI inflation fan chart in 2016 Q4 for the
market interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock
of purchased assets remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands in Chart 5.10 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like the fan
charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey outline
represents the corresponding cross-section of the August 2015 Inflation Report fan chart,
which was conditioned on market interest rates and the same assumption about the stock
of purchased assets.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
inflation being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given inflation rate, specified to one
decimal place.
40 Inflation Report November 2015
the first two years (Chart 5.10): inflation may prove to be
more persistently weak than assumed in the near term and the
downside risks to activity also imply downside risks to
inflation. The mean projection, which takes into account the
balance of risks, is therefore at the target at the two-year
point, as it was in August, and above it in year three.
Charts 5.11 and 5.12 show the MPC’s projections under the
alternative assumption that Bank Rate remains at 0.5%
throughout the forecast period.(1) On that path, growth and
inflation are higher than the market rate profiles, although the
level of output and inflation are lower than in the August
constant rate projections.
(1) The constant rate projections in this Report assume that Bank Rate is 0.5% for the
next three years, and then rises towards the market path over the next three years;
that path is anticipated by businesses and households.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
ONS data
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
+
–
See footnote to Chart 5.1.
Chart 5.11 GDP projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased assets
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
Chart 5.12 CPI inflation projection based on constant
nominal interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased
assets
See footnote to Chart 5.2.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 41
Other forecasters’ expectations
Every three months, the Bank asks a sample of external
forecasters for their latest economic projections. This box
reports the results of the most recent survey, carried out in
October.(1) On average, respondents expected four-quarter
GDP growth to remain at 2.3% throughout the next
three years (Table 1), a touch weaker than forecasters’
expectations at the time of the August Report. The range of
forecasters’ two year ahead expectations of GDP growth stood
at its widest for over three years (Chart A).
The average of respondents’ central expectations for
CPI inflation in one year’s time was 1.6%, higher than the
MPC’s central projection of 1.2% (Chart B). But at two years
and beyond, respondents expected inflation to be around the
2% target, slightly lower than the MPC’s projection
conditioned on the path for Bank Rate implied by market
interest rates. On average, external forecasters thought there
was around a 25% probability that CPI inflation will be above
the target in one year’s time, while that probability was
around 50% in three years’ time.
The modal expectation among external forecasters of the first
rise in Bank Rate was pushed back to 2016 Q2, compared to
2016 Q1 at the time of the August Report. External
forecasters continue to expect rises in Bank Rate to be gradual,
with an average expectation for Bank Rate of 2.3% in
three years’ time. The average of forecasters’ central
expectations for Bank Rate in 2017 Q4 and 2018 Q4 was,
however, materially higher than that implied by market
interest rates (Chart C).
(1) For detailed distributions of other forecasters’ expectations, see ‘Other forecasters’
expectations’ on the Bank’s website, available at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2015/novofe.pdf.
Table 1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections(a)
 2016 Q4 2017 Q4 2018 Q4
CPI inflation(b) 1.6 2.0 2.1
GDP growth(c) 2.3 2.3 2.3
LFS unemployment rate 5.2 5.0 4.9
Bank Rate (per cent) 1.1 1.7 2.3
Stock of purchased assets (£ billions)(d) 370 350 323
Sterling ERI 91.6 89.8 87.8
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 29 October 2015.
(a) For 2016 Q4, there were 28 forecasts for CPI inflation and GDP growth, 27 for Bank Rate and the
unemployment rate, 19 for the stock of purchased assets and 10 for the sterling ERI. For 2017 Q4, there
were 24 forecasts for CPI inflation and GDP growth, 25 for Bank Rate, 23 for the unemployment rate, 17 for
the stock of purchased assets and 10 for the sterling ERI. For 2018 Q4, there were 21 forecasts for
CPI inflation, GDP growth and Bank Rate, 20 for the unemployment rate, 14 for the stock of purchased
assets and 10 for the sterling ERI.
(b) Twelve-month rate.
(c) Four-quarter percentage change.
(d) Original purchase value. Purchased via the creation of central bank reserves.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
2010 11 12 13 14 15
Range of external
 forecasters
Average of external
 forecasters
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Chart A The range of external forecasters’ GDP growth
expectations has widened
Forecasters’ central projections of two year ahead GDP growth
Source: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports between February 2010
and November 2015.
0.0
1.0
2.0
2.5
1.5
0.5
3.0
2016 Q4 2017 Q4 2018 Q4
Percentage increases in prices on a year earlier
MPC modal projection
Interquartile range of external forecasters
Range of external forecasters
Chart B Most external forecasters expect inflation to be
around the target in two and three years’ time
Forecasters’ central projections of CPI inflation
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 29 October 2015.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2016 Q4 2017 Q4 2018 Q4
Per cent
Forward interest rates(a)
Interquartile range of external forecasters
Range of external forecasters
Chart C Forecasters expect a broadly higher path for
Bank Rate than that implied by market prices
Forecasters’ central projections of Bank Rate, and forward interest rates
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 29 October 2015, Bloomberg and
Bank calculations.
(a) Estimated using instantaneous forward overnight index swap rates in the fifteen working
days to 28 October.
42 Inflation Report November 2015
How has the economy evolved relative to the
August 2014 Report?
Each year the MPC publishes an assessment of how the
economy has evolved relative to its forecasts. This box looks
at how outturns for CPI inflation, GDP growth and the
unemployment rate compare to projections in the
August 2014 Inflation Report, and why they have differed
from expectations. For a summary of the Independent
Evaluation Office’s statistical evaluation of the Bank’s
forecasts made over a longer period, see the box on
pages 44–46.
Key developments
In the August 2014 central projection, output growth was
expected to moderate slightly as the boost from pent-up
demand faded, and then to grow at rates close to its historical
average, sustained by a revival in productivity and household
real incomes. The pace at which remaining slack would be
absorbed was projected to slow, which, together with the
impact of the appreciation in sterling on import prices, would
restrain cost pressures. Inflation was expected to remain a
little below, but close to, 2%, before reaching the target by
the end of the three-year forecast period. The August 2014
forecast was conditioned on broadly stable paths for oil prices
and sterling and on a gradual rise in interest rates.
In fact, inflation was 1.7 percentage points weaker than
expected in 2015 Q3 (Chart A). A significant part — although
not all — of that weakness reflects an unexpectedly large fall
in oil prices over the past year. Oil prices have fallen by over
50% since August 2014; option prices at the time of the
August 2014 Report suggested that market participants
had placed a negligible weight on such a fall occurring.
GDP growth moderated broadly as anticipated, but it was
slightly weaker than projected (Chart B). Household
consumption growth evolved broadly as expected. While
exports, stockbuilding and business investment made a
weaker-than-expected contribution to GDP growth, that was
offset by weaker imports. The unemployment rate evolved
broadly in line with the central projection. The rest of this
box discusses the underlying drivers of the economy over the
past year, relative to the expectations set out in the
August 2014 Report.
Global growth has been slower than expected
World GDP rose modestly in the year to 2015 Q2, but at a
weaker pace than projected in August 2014 (Table 1). That
reflected weaker growth in the euro area and in emerging
economies. Consistent with the downside news, UK export
growth since 2014 Q2 has been weaker than projected.
Private domestic demand growth has been
underpinned by stronger-than-expected productivity
and real income growth
While in August 2014, consumption growth was expected to
be funded through a pickup in real incomes and a fall in the
household saving ratio, in fact, consumption growth rose
broadly in line with the rise in real incomes and the saving
ratio was flatter than projected (Table 1). Real income growth
in the year to 2015 Q2 was almost a percentage point higher
than anticipated, reflecting the boost from lower energy
prices, as well as stronger wage growth.
Business investment growth, however, was weaker than
anticipated. That is likely to reflect the impact of oil price falls
on capital spending in the extraction sector, as well as weaker
external demand. Import growth was also weaker than
expected, reflecting weaker growth in import-intensive
components of demand.
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
August 2014 fan chart(a)
Outturns
Chart A Inflation has fallen much more than projected
CPI inflation outturn and projection in the August 2014 Report
(a) Based on market interest rate expectations and the assumption that the stock of purchased
assets remained at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. See footnote to Chart 5.2 in
the August 2014 Report for information on how to interpret the fan chart.
Estimates implied by
 the mode of the
 latest backcast(b)
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
Bank estimates in August 2014
 of past growth
Latest vintage of data
August 2014 fan chart(a)
Chart B GDP growth moderated as anticipated
GDP outturn and projection in the August 2014 Report
(a) Based on market interest rate expectations and the assumption that the stock of purchased
assets remained at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. See footnote to Chart 5.1 in
the August 2014 Report for information on how to interpret the fan chart.
(b) The latest backcast is a judgement about the path for GDP in the mature estimate of the data.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 43
Supply capacity has expanded, reflecting a pickup in
hourly productivity and a diminution in slack
Potential supply growth is judged to have been somewhat
stronger than anticipated in 2014. In part, that reflects
faster-than-expected hourly productivity growth (Chart C),
although some of that rise is likely to reflect cyclical rather
than structural factors. Productivity per head, in contrast, rose
by slightly less than projected. Correspondingly, the degree of
slack over most of the past year is judged to have been
somewhat wider than anticipated in August 2014, reflecting
greater slack within the labour market. For example, the MPC
now judges that the output gap in 2014 Q3 was around ½ a
percentage point larger than judged at the time of the
August 2014 Report. In 2015 Q2, however, the degree of slack
is judged to have been broadly in line with the August 2014
projection.
The drag on inflation from food and energy prices was
greater than expected
Inflation has been significantly weaker than projected in
August 2014 (Chart A). Much of that news can be explained
by lower-than-expected energy and food prices, reflecting
falls in dollar oil and agricultural commodities prices of
around 55% and 13% respectively; competition between
supermarkets may also have weighed on food price inflation.
Import price inflation was stronger than anticipated in the
four quarters to 2015 Q2 (Table 1), despite sterling having
been 6% higher relative to the conditioning path for the
August 2014 projections and non-energy world export prices
falling by more than projected. Reflecting that, past falls in
import prices have exerted slightly less of a drag on
CPI inflation over the past year than was projected in
August 2014.
Despite the greater degree of slack over the past, the pickup
in wage growth came through somewhat quicker than
projected. Reflecting that pickup, as well as slightly
weaker-than-expected growth in productivity per head,
unit wage cost growth was stronger than expected in 2015 Q2
(Table 1).
Implications for the MPC’s projections
Overall, growth moderated broadly as anticipated in the
August 2014 Report, despite the boost to real incomes from
falls in oil prices. In part, that is likely to reflect weaker global
growth. Largely due to falls in food, energy and other
imported goods prices, inflation was significantly weaker than
had been expected in August 2014. These developments are
reflected in the key judgements underpinning the MPC’s
November 2015 forecasts (Section 5). World demand growth
is expected to be weaker, weighing on UK GDP growth relative
to projections at the time of the August 2014 Report. Some of
the recent strength in productivity growth is judged to be
cyclical and therefore temporary (Section 3). And the relative
resilience of import prices has prompted a reassessment of the
extent to which global price pressures will be passed through
to UK import price inflation (see the box on pages 28–29).
+
–
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2013 14 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Projections at the time of
 the August 2014 Report
Latest vintage
 of data
Data at the time of the
 August 2014 Report
Chart C Hourly productivity has risen by more than projected
Productivity growth outturn and projection in the August 2014 Report(a)
(a) GDP at market prices per hour worked. GDP is based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast.
Hours worked are based on Bank staff’s assumption for population growth, as explained in
the May 2015 Report.
Table 1 Assessing the key judgements from the August 2014
Report
Conditioning assumptions Per cent growth between 2014 Q2
and key judgement and 2015 Q2, unless otherwise stated
 August 2014 projection Current estimate
Conditioning assumptions(a)
Bank Rate 0.9 0.5
Sterling ERI (index)(b) 88.4 91.2
Dollar oil prices 106.7 62.1
1: the global economy expands steadily in the face of continuing economic and
financial challenges
UK-weighted world GDP(c) 2¾ 2¼
2: a gradual revival in productivity and real incomes underpins a sustained expansion
in private sector spending
Credit spreads(d) -¼ -¼
Household saving ratio(e) -1¼ -½
Business investment(f) 11½ 3
3: the remaining slack in the economy is absorbed, but at a more gradual pace than in
the recent past, reflecting a modest expansion in supply
Productivity(g) 1 1½
Participation rate(h) 64 63¼
Average hours(i) 32½ 32
4: as the drag from slack lessens, the associated path for wage growth and margins is
consistent with the inflation target
Import prices(j) -2½ -1
Unit wage costs(k) ½ 1½
Sources: Bank of England, BDRC Continental SME Finance Monitor, Bloomberg, BofA Merrill Lynch
Global Research, British Household Panel Survey, Department for Business, Innovation and Skills,
IMF World Economic Outlook, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Average level in 2015 Q2, per cent.
(b) Index: January 2005 = 100.
(c) See footnote (c) to Table 5.B for information on how world GDP is calculated.
(d) Percentage point change between 2014 Q2 and 2015 Q2. See footnote (k) to Table 5.B for a definition of
credit spreads.
(e) Percentage point change in the household saving ratio.
(f) Chained-volume business investment.
(g) GDP per hour worked. GDP at market prices is based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast.
(h) Percentage of 16+ population.
(i) Average weekly hours worked in main job and second job.
(j) Excludes the impact of missing trader intra-community fraud. As advised by the ONS in the notice released
on 2 November 2015 and discussed on pages 25–26, the observation for 2015 Q2 shows the price index for
goods excluding oil and erratics, as defined in footnote 1 on page 26, weighted together with the services
import price deflator.
(k) Employee wages and salaries and household mixed income divided by GDP at market prices based on the
mode of the MPC’s backcast.
The Monetary Policy Committee’s response
to the Independent Evaluation Office
evaluation of the MPC’s forecasting
performance
The MPC welcomes the Independent Evaluation Office (IEO)
evaluation of the MPC’s forecasting performance. In
late 2014, the IEO was asked by the Court of Directors to
provide it with a better basis for evaluating the Bank’s forecast
performance. The IEO subsequently undertook a wide-ranging
statistical evaluation of the Bank’s forecasts, the details of
which have been published alongside this Inflation Report.(1)
The IEO’s assessment reinforces existing initiatives and
provides new insights. This box highlights the key empirical
findings and recommendations from this work and sets out a
series of initiatives that the MPC will be putting in place.
The MPC’s macroeconomic projections are central to the
formation and communication of its policy decisions.
Projections of GDP growth, the unemployment rate and
CPI inflation are presented as fan charts, to portray the
uncertainty involved; central projections are presented for a
number of other variables (Section 5). To improve its
understanding of the economy and its forecasting capabilities,
the MPC regularly assesses how and why economic
developments differed from its earlier central expectations
and how the distribution of outturns compares with the
fan charts. It has also benefited from a number of
independent reports identifying areas for improvement since
the MPC’s inception in 1997.(2)
Summary of the IEO’s work programme
The IEO’s work focused on a statistical evaluation of the
Bank’s forecasts made since 1997 at various horizons. The
evaluation covered data outturns up until 2014, so, for
example, the most recent two year ahead quarterly forecasts
included were made in 2012. The IEO updated previous
analysis examining the performance of the MPC’s projections
for GDP growth and CPI inflation. The IEO’s analysis largely
reinforced the conclusions of that previous work.(3) It
expanded on that work by considering the forecasting
performance of other key variables of interest to both the
MPC and the Financial Policy Committee. It additionally
considered how the Bank’s projections compared with the
forecasts generated by simple statistical processes, and the
projections of other central banks and private sector
forecasters.
The MPC’s projections for GDP growth since 1997 were
assessed to have performed relatively well, and did not exhibit
statistically significant signs of bias. In other words,
projections did not systematically under or overpredict
outturns. These projections also compared favourably with
those of private sector institutions. The MPC’s inflation
projections also showed no statistically significant signs of
bias. The forecast accuracy of the MPC’s one year ahead
inflation projection tended to compare favourably with that of
other forecasters. The forecast accuracy of the two year
ahead inflation projection compared less favourably,
particularly for projections made following the start of the
crisis.
The IEO noted a more general deterioration in two year ahead
forecast accuracy since the start of the financial crisis, for both
GDP growth and inflation. This was not unique to the Bank:
projections made by UK private sector forecasters also became
less accurate, and it seems likely that the economy became
more difficult to forecast following the onset of the crisis. The
accuracy of some of the Bank’s longer-term forecasts appears
to have declined relative to that of other forecasters: an
example of this would be the two year ahead inflation
projection, where the Bank appears to have underestimated
the persistence of factors influencing inflation. The sample in
the post-crisis period was relatively small, however, and the
IEO stated that these results should be interpreted with
caution.
The IEO’s work programme also encompassed other variables
— such as labour market variables — that have not been
evaluated in previously published statistical studies. For much
of the period considered, only GDP growth and inflation
projections were published, and while projections for other
variables provided background information for the forecasts of
GDP growth and inflation, the MPC did not formally agree
them. Since 2013, the MPC has published a projection for the
unemployment rate. Since 2014, it has also included in the
Inflation Report projections for additional variables produced
by Bank staff.(4) This follows recommendations made by the
Stockton Review.
Over the sample period as a whole, forecasts for the
unemployment rate exhibited signs of bias and were less
accurate than those produced by a simple statistical rule that
assumed outturns for subsequent periods were the same as
(1) The full evaluation can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Documents/
ieo/evaluation1115.pdf. More background on the IEO can be found at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Pages/ieo/default.aspx.
(2) See Pagan, A (2003), ‘Report on modelling and forecasting at the Bank of England’,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring, pages 60–88;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/qb/2003/qb030106.pdf,
and Stockton, D (2012), ‘Review of the Monetary Policy Committee’s forecasting
capability’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr3stockton.pdf.
(3) For a recent discussion of the efficiency and bias of the MPC’s GDP growth and
CPI inflation forecasts see, for example, Hackworth, C, Radia, A and Roberts, N
(2013), ‘Understanding the MPC’s forecast performance since mid-2010’,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 53, No. 4, pages 336–50;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2013/
qb130405.pdf.
(4) See for example, Table 5.B on page 32 for projections of the variables consistent with
the MPC’s key judgements, and 5.D on page 37 for indicative projections of other
variables produced by Bank staff to be consistent with the MPC’s fan charts.
44 Inflation Report November 2015
the latest observation. This in part reflected relatively large
forecast errors in the pre-2001 period, perhaps due to a
persistent decline, more evident after the event, in the natural
rate of unemployment. If the pre-2001 data points were
excluded, the findings of bias, and of outperformance by a
simple statistical rule, were not statistically significant. That
said, the accuracy of the Bank’s unemployment forecasts
compared relatively poorly with those of other forecasters;
the IEO noted signs of improvement more recently, although
it is too early to be confident that this represents a systematic
change.
The IEO work also considered Bank projections for house price
inflation, consumption growth, investment growth, wage
growth, lending, US GDP growth and euro-area GDP growth.
House price inflation projections had been persistently too
low, but since the crisis they had been no less accurate than
those of most private sector forecasters. Projections for
consumption and investment growth were generally unbiased,
although comparisons of forecast accuracy with other
institutions’ projections showed mixed results. Projections for
US and euro-area GDP growth have been broadly as accurate
as those produced by the US Federal Reserve and the
European Central Bank.
The MPC’s initiatives to strengthen its forecasting
capabilities
The IEO made a number of recommendations. The MPC has
discussed these and, in the context of initiatives already under
way following the 2012 Stockton Review, is taking a number of
steps in response.
Recommendation 1: Learn more from other models
and forecasters
The IEO work suggests that the MPC could benefit from
drawing on the insights of other forecasters and other
economic models.
The MPC will expand its suite of statistical models. The
MPC already uses a number of economic models, including
some that describe the financial sector and other key
economic mechanisms not present in its main forecasting
model. This work will expand the suite by increasing the range
of models that place a greater emphasis on fitting the data
than describing economic channels — so-called
‘non-structural’ models — as these historically have produced
more accurate statistical projections at some forecast
horizons.(1) Types of model that may be particularly useful to
the MPC would be those that require few judgements to be
made about certain aspects of the economy, such as its supply
potential.
Although such models often have a better forecasting
performance they lack a coherent economic structure and are
not suitable for simulating the effects of particular shocks or
the impact of changes in policy. So they cannot substitute for
the MPC’s main structural model, founded in economic theory
and estimated on UK data, which is much better suited for
answering such questions. Further work is needed on how to
use non-structural models as a part of the policymaking
process. When agreeing a projection, the MPC would need to
weigh up the relative benefits of the two approaches.
In expanding its use of statistical models, the Bank will
engage more with other experts in the field. This will enable
the MPC to benefit from others’ modelling expertise when
expanding the range of statistical models. One option under
consideration is to draw on the work of the external
researchers who participate in the Bank’s broader research
agenda.
This initiative continues a broader aim of increasing external
engagement. The Bank has for some years conducted a
Monetary Policy Roundtable, twice a year, where outside
economists are asked to present views. There is a specialised
briefing of the quarterly Inflation Report for economists.
Following the Stockton Review there has been a greater focus
on systematically gathering the views of external
commentators on a more regular basis. Moreover, the MPC
has three times this year invited groups of academic
economists to present their views on topics of interest.
Recommendation 2: Learn more systematically from
the past
The IEO work programme reiterated the importance of
continuing forecast evaluation. Since its inception, the MPC
has regularly assessed how and why economic developments
differed from its earlier central expectations for GDP growth
and inflation and how outturns compare to its fan charts. The
MPC’s latest evaluation, set out in the box on pages 42–43,
evaluates the MPC’s August 2014 projections against the key
judgements that underpinned them. This allows the MPC to
understand the factors explaining such deviations and whether
they are likely to persist, providing a firmer basis for making
adjustments to its subsequent forecasts. Over time, these
evaluations will cover the performance of the wider set of
variables published alongside the Report since February 2014.
Another recent initiative is the introduction of ‘stocktakes’ of
slower-moving macroeconomic forces, such as the economy’s
supply potential. These stocktakes consider a wide range of
evidence, including from structural and non-structural models,
on developments over a number of years. The MPC’s
(1) For a recent evaluation of projections from a structural model see Fawcett, N,
Körber, L, Masolo, R M and Waldron, M (2015), ‘Evaluating UK point and density
forecasts from an estimated DSGE model: the role of off-model information over the
financial crisis’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 538;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2015/swp538.pdf.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 45
reassessment of the supply potential of the economy is a
recent example of this, and was presented in the May 2015
Report.
Alongside such evaluations, the Bank will undertake a more
systematic statistical monitoring of the performance of the
MPC’s central projections. These tests, which will be
reported to the Bank’s Court on a regular basis, will consider
any evidence of statistical bias or inefficiency (whether
projections could have been improved by incorporating other
information). These tests will need to be designed in such a
way that the MPC can quickly identify whether outturns differ
from expectations by an unusually large degree. Convincingly
assessing the statistical performance of a forecast is not
possible, however, if there are only a small number of
observations, as highlighted in the IEO work.(1)
The Bank will also more systematically assess outturns
relative to the MPC’s fan charts, which illustrate the
uncertainty around the central projection. If the fan chart
accurately describes the uncertainty faced by the MPC, and
the sample were sufficiently large, then outturns would be
expected to lie evenly across the fan chart distribution.
Recommendation 3: Challenge convention more
The IEO evaluation emphasises the importance of regular
opportunities to challenge the MPC’s key judgements.
The initiatives addressing Recommendations 1 and 2 will also
address this recommendation. And they will complement the
changes made following the Stockton Review, which included
increased engagement with economic commentators and
greater transparency around the variables underlying the
MPC’s forecasts. These and other initiatives are designed to
enhance and encourage challenges to the MPC’s view of the
outlook.
Recommendation 4: Provide more support for
non-MPC internal users of the Bank’s forecasts
Projections produced as part of the MPC’s forecast process are
increasingly used across the Bank in its other policy functions.
In order to help these internal users understand the weight
they should put on those projections, clearer guidance will be
provided on the level of oversight of different forecast
variables. This will be based on the projections’ relative
status, and in particular the distinction between the key
forecast variables published as fan charts collectively agreed
by the MPC, others published in the Report, and the less
prominent unpublished series.
Conclusions
To help improve its understanding of the economy and so its
forecasting capabilities, the MPC regularly assesses its past
forecasting performance. In recent years, it has implemented
a number of changes designed to improve its forecasting
capabilities and make its forecasts more transparent. In light
of the IEO work, the MPC has agreed further new initiatives:
• develop a wider range of statistical models;
• further increase engagement with other experts, especially
in developing new models;
• develop formal statistical tests to assess the performance of
the MPC’s projections and to try to identify changes in the
economy’s behaviour; and
• provide clear guidance to internal users on the relative
degree of oversight of the various forecast variables.
Together, the initiatives aim to allow the MPC to identify
more quickly whether outturns appear to be systematically
moving away from earlier expectations, and to improve the
analytical framework underlying its projections. The Bank’s
forecast processes have also changed in various ways since the
2012 Stockton Review, and it is too soon to assess the impact
of those changes. There would therefore be merit in repeating
an evaluation exercise of a similar nature in a few years’ time.
(1) For a discussion of the issues around testing forecasting performance with a small
sample see Broadbent, B (2013), ‘Forecast errors’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech653.pdf.
46 Inflation Report November 2015
 Index of charts and tables 47
Index of charts and tables
Charts
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.1 International equity prices 1
1.2 Outturns and IMF forecasts for calendar-year GDP
growth in emerging and advanced economies 3
1.3 Chinese activity indicators 3
1.4 Renminbi-US dollar exchange rate 4
1.5 Composite PMIs in selected countries 4
1.6 Euro-area and US unemployment rates 5
1.7 Implied volatilities for equity prices and interest rates
in the United States 5
1.8 US dollar oil and commodity prices 5
1.9 Asset price based decomposition of oil prices 6
1.10 Constituents of the FTSE All-Share by geographical
focus 6
1.11 International corporate bond spreads 7
1.12 UK banks’ indicative long-term funding spreads 7
1.13 International forward interest rates 7
1.14 International ten-year government bond yields 8
1.15 Effective exchange rates 8
How would a slowdown in China affect the UK economy? 2
A International trade flows 2
2 Demand and output 10
2.1 Bank staff’s projections for near-term output growth 11
2.2 Contributions to quarterly GDP growth by output
sector 11
2.3 Measures of uncertainty and household
unemployment and financial expectations 12
2.4 Average quoted household interest rates 14
2.5 Mortgage approvals by type 14
2.6 Monthly net mortgage lending 16
2.7 Investment intention surveys and business investment 16
2.8 Net external finance raised by PNFCs 17
2.9 UK current account 17
Revisions to the National Accounts 13
A Contributions to revisions to GDP by expenditure
 component 13
B Business investment 13
C Revisions to household income, consumption and
 measures of the saving ratio 13
Household balance sheets 15
A Aggregate household debt to income 15
B Proportion of households with high mortgage debt
to gross income ratios 15
C Household debt service ratio and its components 15
3 Supply and the labour market 18
3.1 Decomposition of four-quarter GDP growth 18
3.2 Average weekly hours: actual, desired and
Bank staff’s estimate of medium-term equilibrium 19
3.3 Survey indicators of capacity utilisation 20
3.4 Annual population growth 20
3.5 Participation rate and Bank staff estimates of the
medium-term equilibrium participation rate 20
3.6 Bank staff’s near-term unemployment rate projection 21
3.7 Vacancy and unemployment rates 21
3.8 Unemployment rates by duration 21
3.9 Four-quarter hourly labour productivity growth 22
3.10 Resignations and voluntary job-to-job flows 22
3.11 Private sector earnings and indicators of pay growth 23
4 Costs and prices 24
4.1 Bank staff’s projection for near-term CPI inflation 24
4.2 Measures of core CPI inflation 25
4.3 Contributions to CPI inflation 25
4.4 Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices 25
4.5 Sterling oil prices and contribution of fuels to
CPI inflation 26
4.6 Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy unit
labour cost growth 26
4.7 Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI) 27
The effect of imported price pressures on UK consumer prices 28
A UK import prices and foreign export prices excluding
fuel 28
B Model-based impact of a 1% change in non-energy
import prices on CPI inflation 29
5 Prospects for inflation 30
5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 30
5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 31
5.3 CPI inflation projection in August based on
market interest rate expectations and £375 billion
purchased assets 31
5.4 Inflation probabilities relative to the target 31
5.5 World GDP (UK-weighted) 35
5.6 Productivity 36
5.7 Unit labour costs 38
5.8 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in 2017 Q4
(central 90% of the distribution) 38
5.9 Unemployment projection based on market interest
rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 39
5.10 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in 2016 Q4
(central 90% of the distribution) 39
5.11 GDP projection based on constant nominal interest
rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased assets 40
5.12 CPI inflation projection based on constant
nominal interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion
purchased assets 40
Other forecasters’ expectations 41
A Forecasters’ central projections of two year ahead
GDP growth 41
B Forecasters’ central projections of CPI inflation 41
C Forecasters’ central projections of Bank Rate,
and forward interest rates 41
How has the economy evolved relative to the
August 2014 Report? 42
A CPI inflation outturn and projection in the
August 2014 Report 42
B GDP outturn and projection in the August 2014 Report 42
C Productivity growth outturn and projection in
the August 2014 Report 43
48 Inflation Report November 2015
Tables
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 1
1.B GDP in selected countries and regions 4
How would a slowdown in China affect the UK economy? 2
1 Impact of a 3% fall in Chinese GDP on UK GDP 2
2 Demand and output 10
2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 10
2.B Expenditure components of demand 12
2.C Household income, consumption and saving 14
3 Supply and the labour market 18
3.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 18
3.B Employment growth, vacancies and survey
indicators of employment intentions 19
3.C Whole-economy earnings 22
4 Costs and prices 24
4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 24
4.B Indicators of inflation expectations 27
5 Prospects for inflation 30
5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by
forward market interest rates 30
5.B MPC key judgements 32
5.C Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements 33
5.D Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s
modal projections 37
5.E Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal,
median and mean paths 38
5.F Q4 CPI inflation 39
Other forecasters’ expectations 41
1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections 41
How has the economy evolved relative to the
August 2014 Report? 42
1 Assessing the key judgements from the
August 2014 Report 43
 Glossary and other information 49
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CDS – credit default swap.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices
index.
DGI – domestically generated inflation.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
RPI – retail prices index.
RPI inflation – inflation measured by the retail prices index.
Abbreviations
BCC – British Chambers of Commerce.
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CEIC – CEIC Data Company Ltd.
CFO – chief financial officer.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EU – European Union.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
IBES – Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MSCI – Morgan Stanley Capital International Inc.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
OPEC – Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
PNFCs – private non-financial corporations.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
PwC – PricewaterhouseCoopers.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SMEs – small and medium-sized enterprises.
VAT – Value Added Tax.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Symbols and conventions
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in
charts and tables is the Bank of England or the Office for
National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from financial
markets data, are seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may
sometimes differ from the total shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first
observation within the relevant period, eg data for the first
quarter of the year.
Glossary and other information
© Bank of England 2015
ISSN 1353-6737
Printed by Park Communications Limited