Inflation Report
May 2016

BANK OF ENGLAND
Inflation Report
May 2016
In order to maintain price stability, the Government has set the Bank’s Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) a target for the annual inflation rate of the Consumer Prices Index of 2%.
Subject to that, the MPC is also required to support the Government’s economic policy,
including its objectives for growth and employment.
The Inflation Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of
the Monetary Policy Committee. It serves two purposes. First, its preparation provides a
comprehensive and forward-looking framework for discussion among MPC members as an aid
to our decision-making. Second, its publication allows us to share our thinking and explain the
reasons for our decisions to those whom they affect.
Although not every member will agree with every assumption on which our projections are
based, the fan charts represent the MPC’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths
for inflation, output and unemployment, as well as the uncertainties surrounding those central
projections.
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998.
The Monetary Policy Committee:
Mark Carney, Governor
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy
Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability
Nemat Shafik, Deputy Governor responsible for markets and banking
Kristin Forbes
Andrew Haldane
Ian McCafferty
Gertjan Vlieghe
Martin Weale
The Inflation Report is available in PDF alongside PowerPoint‰ versions of the charts and
Excel spreadsheets of the data underlying most of them at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/2016/may.aspx.

 Monetary Policy Summary i
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.1 Developments in financial markets 1
1.2 Global economic developments 7
Box Monetary policy since the February Report 3
Box Asset prices and the referendum on membership of the European Union 5
2 Demand and output 10
2.1 Output 10
2.2 Domestic demand 11
2.3 Net trade and the current account 17
Box Uncertainty and GDP growth 14
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.1 Labour market developments and productivity 19
3.2 Labour market slack and capacity utilisation 21
3.3 Wages 22
4 Costs and prices 24
4.1 CPI inflation 24
4.2 Imported cost pressures 25
4.3 Domestic cost pressures 27
5 Prospects for inflation 29
5.1 Key judgements and risks 31
5.2 The projections for demand, unemployment and inflation 39
Box The treatment of asset prices in the May Inflation Report projections 40
Box Risks associated with the referendum on UK membership of the European Union 41
Box Other forecasters’ expectations 44
Index of charts and tables 45
Glossary and other information 47
Contents

 Monetary Policy Summary i
Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet the
2% inflation target and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its
meeting ending on 11 May 2016 the MPC voted unanimously to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5%.
The Committee also voted unanimously to maintain the stock of purchased assets financed
by the issuance of central bank reserves at £375 billion.
Twelve-month CPI inflation increased to 0.5% in March but remains well below the 2% inflation target. This shortfall is
due predominantly to unusually large drags from energy and food prices, which are expected to fade over the next year.
Core inflation also remains subdued, largely as a result of weak global price pressures, the past appreciation of sterling
and restrained domestic cost growth.
Globally, sentiment in financial markets has improved. There has been a broad-based recovery in risky asset prices, a
resumption of capital flows to emerging market economies, and a sharp rise in the price of oil. Near-term prospects for
China and other emerging market economies have improved a little, although medium-term downside risks remain. In
the advanced economies, growth has picked up in the euro area in Q1 but slowed in the United States. A modest pace of
growth in the United Kingdom’s main trading partners is likely over the forecast period, broadly similar to that in the
February Inflation Report projections.
In the United Kingdom, activity growth slowed in Q1 and a further deceleration is expected in Q2. There are increasing
signs that uncertainty associated with the EU referendum has begun to weigh on activity. This is making the relationship
between macroeconomic and financial indicators and underlying economic momentum harder to interpret at present. In
the Committee’s latest projections, activity growth recovers later in the year, but to rates that are a little below their
historical average. Growth over the forecast horizon is expected to be slightly weaker than in the February projection.
The May projection is conditioned on a path for Bank Rate implied by market rates and on continued UK membership of
the European Union, including an assumption for the exchange rate consistent with that.
As the dampening influence of past falls in energy and food prices unwinds over the next year, inflation should rise
mechanically. Under the same forecast conditioning assumptions described above, spare capacity is projected to be
eliminated by early next year, increasing domestic cost pressures and supporting a return of inflation to the 2% target by
mid-2018. Thereafter, as in the February Inflation Report, inflation is forecast to rise slightly above the target,
conditioned on the path for Bank Rate implied by market rates.
Given the outlook described in the May Inflation Report projections, returning inflation to the 2% target requires
achieving a balance between the drag on inflation from external factors and the support from gradual increases in
domestic cost growth. Fully offsetting the drag from external factors over the short run would, in the MPC’s judgement,
involve too rapid an acceleration in domestic costs, one that would risk being excessive and lead to undesirable volatility
in output and employment. Given these considerations, the MPC intends to set monetary policy to ensure that growth is
sufficient to return inflation to the target in around two years and keep it there in the absence of further shocks.
Consistent with the projections and conditioning assumptions set out in the May Inflation Report, the MPC judges that it
is more likely than not that Bank Rate will need to be higher by the end of the forecast period than at present to ensure
inflation returns to the target in a sustainable manner. All members agree that, given the likely persistence of the
headwinds weighing on the economy, when Bank Rate does begin to rise, it is expected to do so more gradually and to a
lower level than in recent cycles. This guidance is an expectation, not a promise. The actual path Bank Rate will follow
over the next few years will depend on economic circumstances. With macroeconomic and financial indicators likely to
ii Inflation Report May 2016
be less informative than usual in light of the referendum, the Committee is currently reacting more cautiously to data
releases than would normally be the case.
The most significant risks to the MPC’s forecast concern the referendum. A vote to leave the EU could materially alter
the outlook for output and inflation, and therefore the appropriate setting of monetary policy. Households could defer
consumption and firms delay investment, lowering labour demand and causing unemployment to rise. At the same time,
supply growth is likely to be lower over the forecast period, reflecting slower capital accumulation and the need to
reallocate resources. Sterling is also likely to depreciate further, perhaps sharply. This combination of influences on
demand, supply and the exchange rate could lead to a materially lower path for growth and a notably higher path for
inflation than in the central projections set out in the May Inflation Report. In such circumstances, the MPC would face a
trade-off between stabilising inflation on the one hand and output and employment on the other. The implications for
the direction of monetary policy will depend on the relative magnitudes of the demand, supply and exchange rate
effects. Whatever the outcome of the referendum and its consequences, the MPC will take whatever action is needed to
ensure that inflation expectations remain well anchored and inflation returns to the target over the appropriate horizon.
Against that backdrop, at its meeting on 11 May, the MPC voted unanimously to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5% and to
maintain the stock of purchased assets, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, at £375 billion.
Global activity growth was subdued in 2015 H2, as the pace of recovery in advanced economies
softened alongside slower growth in emerging market economies. Inflation remains low globally,
primarily due to past falls in commodity prices. After increased financial market volatility around
the turn of the year, a number of factors, including policy announcements, appear to have
contributed to a recovery in the prices of risky assets and should support the outlook for global
activity. Sterling is 9% below its November peak, a material proportion of which appears to reflect
the referendum on UK membership of the European Union.
1 Global economic and financial
developments
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 1
Following the volatility in financial markets around the turn of
the year, sentiment in risky asset markets appears to have
improved since the February Report (Section 1.1). One factor
supporting that recovery has been communication by several
central banks suggesting more stimulative monetary policy
than had previously been expected. This was accompanied by
a further material flattening in benchmark yield curves
(Chart 1.1). In addition, the relative stability of the renminbi
and some reduction in concerns about near-term growth
prospects in China (Section 1.2) have provided a fillip to risk
sentiment and commodity prices (Section 1.1). An
improvement in sentiment has also been reflected in measures
of financial market risk aversion, such as option-implied equity
price volatility, which has fallen back to mid-2015 levels
(Chart 1.2). Overall, these developments should support the
outlook for global growth, which remains broadly unchanged
from the February Report.
Sterling is 9% below its November peak (Section 1.1). As
explained in the box on page 5, there is evidence to suggest
that roughly half of that decline reflects perceived risks
associated with the referendum on UK membership of the
European Union. So far, there is much more limited evidence
of effects on UK interest rates and equity prices.
1.1 Developments in financial markets
Monetary policy and short-term interest rates
In recent months, monetary policy actions and
communications by several central banks are likely to have
supported sentiment in risky asset markets and are probably
one factor behind lower expectations of future policy rates:
benchmark yield curves in the United Kingdom, United States
and the euro area were materially flatter in the run-up to the
May Report than in February (Chart 1.1).
Table 1.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in February Developments since February
Advanced economies Broadly as expected
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average a
little below 1/2%. Inflation expected to
remain close to zero.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a little
above 1/2%; PCE inflation of around 1%.
• Euro-area GDP increased by 0.6% in
Q1. Inflation was -0.2% in April 2016.
• US GDP rose by 0.1% in Q1. PCE
inflation was 0.8% in March.
Rest of the world Broadly as expected
• Average four-quarter PPP-weighted
EME growth of around 33/4%; Chinese GDP
growth to average around 61/2%.
• EME GDP growth was 3.8% in Q4.
Chinese GDP growth was 6.7% in Q1.
Commodity prices and the exchange rate Oil prices higher; sterling lower
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to evolve
in line with the conditioning assumptions.
• US dollar oil prices are around 50%
higher. The sterling ERI depreciated
by around 3%.
+
–
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2013 14 15 16 17 18 19
Per cent
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
Solid lines: May Report
Dashed lines: February Report
ECB deposit rate
ECB main
 refinancing rate
Federal funds rate(b)
Bank Rate
Chart 1.1 Market-implied paths for US, UK and
euro-area policy rates have all flattened
International forward interest rates(a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, European Central Bank (ECB) and Federal Reserve.
(a) The May 2016 and February 2016 curves are estimated using instantaneous forward
overnight index swap rates in the fifteen working days to 4 May and 27 January respectively.
(b) Upper bound of the target range.
2 Inflation Report May 2016
One driver of lower short-term interest rates was the
announcement by the Bank of Japan (BoJ) on 29 January, in
the run-up to the February Report, that it would introduce
negative interest rates. This announcement took markets by
surprise and, in the following weeks, interest rates fell in
several other economies (Chart 1.3). On 27 April, the BoJ left
policy unchanged against expectations among market
contacts for a further loosening, although there was limited
reaction in short-term interest rates.
The announcement on 10 March of a number of easing
measures by the European Central Bank (ECB) (Table 1.B)
appears to have had little impact on short-term interest rates
(Chart 1.3), although the effect on risky asset markets was
more pronounced. In part, that was because several of those
measures — such as changes in policy rates and an increase in
the programme of asset purchases — had been widely
anticipated by market participants. In addition, the measures
that had been less widely anticipated — such as the extension
of the scope of asset purchases and amendments to the
long-term refinancing scheme — would tend to support
financing conditions by lowering the cost of issuing corporate
bonds or supporting bank lending, rather than directly
lowering short-term market interest rates. The ECB made no
further policy changes at its meeting on 21 April.
In the United States, the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) kept rates on hold in March and April, as expected by
market participants. The average of FOMC members’
expected future paths for interest rates was, however, revised
down in March by more than had been expected and market
interest rates fell in response (Chart 1.3).
In the United Kingdom, the market-implied path for Bank Rate
reaches 0.8% in three years’ time, compared with a little over
1% at the time of the February Report (Chart 1.1). The box on
page 3 discusses the factors behind the MPC’s decisions in
March and April, while the factors underpinning the
Committee’s May decision are set out in the Monetary Policy
Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail in
the Minutes of the meeting. As set out in the box on page 5,
while the referendum on UK membership of the
European Union may be having some effect on UK short-term
interest rates, there is little evidence that this has been a
significant factor so far.
Longer-term interest rates
Longer-term interest rates in the United Kingdom,
United States and euro area have been more stable than
short-term rates in recent months, although they remain
lower than in mid-2015 (Chart 1.4). Some of the fall over this
period was due to lower real rates (Chart 1.5). While that may
have reflected perceptions of a weaker global growth outlook
or increased downside risks, it is also likely to have reflected
continuing asset purchases by the ECB and BoJ. Purchases of
+
–
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2011 12 13 14 15 16
Difference from average since 2003 (number of standard deviations)
February Report
Chart 1.2 Market-based measures of risk premia have
fallen back
Implied volatility for US equity prices(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) VIX measure of 30-day implied volatility of the S&P 500 equity index.
+
–
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5 Per cent
BoJ ECB FOMC
Nov. Jan. Mar. May
2015 16
Euro area
United States
United Kingdom
February Report
Chart 1.3 International short-term interest rates are
lower
International three-year forward interest rates(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Instantaneous three-year forward overnight index swap rates. Dashed lines mark selected
policy announcements by central banks.
Table 1.B The ECB announced a number of policy easing
measures in March
Policy announcements by the ECB at its March meeting
Policy instrument Announcement
Interest rates Main refinancing operations
Deposit facility
Marginal lending facility
Reduce from 0.05% to 0.00%.
Reduce from -0.30% to -0.40%.
Reduce from 0.30% to 0.25%.
Asset purchases Asset purchase scheme Increase purchase rate from
€60 billion to €80 billion per
month from April.
Extend eligible assets to include
euro-denominated
investment-grade bonds issued by
non-banks.
Market operations Targeted long-term
refinancing operations
(TLTROs)
A new series of TLTROs with a
maturity of four years to be
launched in June. Structured so as
to further incentivise bank lending
to the real economy.
Source: ECB.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 3
Monetary policy since the February Report
The MPC’s central projection in the February Report, under the
assumptions that Bank Rate followed a path implied by
market interest rates and that the stock of purchased assets
remained at £375 billion, was that four-quarter GDP growth
would rise to around 2½% over the forecast period, driven by
private domestic demand growth. CPI inflation in two years’
time was expected to exceed the 2% target slightly and then
rise further, as domestic cost pressures built and the drags
from past falls in energy and imported goods prices unwound.
At its meeting ending on 16 March, the MPC noted that
GDP growth in Q4 was unchanged from the ONS’s initial
estimate of 0.5% and data releases showed little change in the
near-term outlook for growth in the United Kingdom’s main
trading partners since the time of the February Report. The
prices of risky assets had risen, however, and short-term
interest rates had fallen, since the MPC’s February meeting,
which if sustained would tend to support UK activity.
Sterling had depreciated by around 3% in effective terms since
the February Report, a significant proportion of which was
likely to have reflected uncertainty surrounding the
forthcoming referendum on UK membership of the
European Union.
CPI inflation had risen to 0.3% in January, slightly weaker than
Bank staff projections. The downside news was largely due to
changes in component weights and had not changed the
near-term forecast materially. Wage growth had evolved
broadly as expected. A key judgement remained how wages
would respond to the past declines in unemployment and
prospective rises in inflation. The latest household survey
measures of inflation expectations had provided conflicting
signals and market-based measures suggested little change in
market participants’ long-term inflation expectations.
All Committee members considered the current stance of
monetary policy to be appropriate. There remained a range of
views about the balance of risks to inflation relative to the
best collective judgement presented in the February Report.
Developments in the global economy ahead of the MPC
meeting ending on 13 April had been mixed. Downside risks to
near-term Chinese growth had lessened following the
authorities’ announcement that they would target only a
modest slowing in demand growth in 2016, while US data
releases suggested weakness in 2016 Q1. Prices of risky assets
had continued to rise internationally, while risk-free interest
rates had fallen further. Sterling had continued to depreciate.
Following the 2015 Q4 UK National Accounts release, the
slowdown between 2014 and 2015 looked shallower than had
previously been the case. More recently, there were some
signs that increased uncertainty related to the referendum had
begun to weigh on certain areas of activity: for example,
survey measures of investment intentions had eased, and
there had been a striking fall in commercial property
transactions, consistent with the likelihood that some business
decisions may be delayed pending the outcome of the vote.
This could lead to some softening in growth during 2016 H1.
Twelve-month CPI inflation had been 0.5% in March, broadly
in line with Bank staff’s expectation at the time of the
February Report. There had been no official labour market
data release since the Committee’s March meeting.
The Committee voted unanimously to maintain the current
stance of policy. The MPC’s best collective judgement was
that it was more likely than not that Bank Rate would need to
increase over the forecast period to return inflation to the
target in a sustainable fashion. Referendum effects were
judged likely to make it harder to interpret macroeconomic
and financial market indicators over the next few months,
however, and the Committee concluded that it was likely to
react more cautiously to data news over this period.
The policy decision at the meeting ending on 11 May, and the
factors behind that decision, are set out in the Monetary
Policy Summary on pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail
in the Minutes of the meeting.(1)
(1) The Minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2016/may.pdf.
long-term bonds by central banks increase the demand for
these assets, raising their prices and lowering their yields. In
addition, other long-term bonds that are seen as close
substitutes, such as those issued in sterling, will also see their
prices rise and yields fall. The fall in long-term interest rates
since mid-2015 was also associated with lower implied
inflation rates: market-based measures of long-term inflation
expectations have fallen in the United Kingdom, United States
and the euro area. Despite having fallen, UK implied inflation
rates remain close to past averages (Section 4). These falls
may reflect lower long-term inflation expectations but these
4 Inflation Report May 2016
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Euro area(b)
United States
United Kingdom
February Report
Chart 1.4 Longer-term nominal interest rates remain
lower than in mid-2015
Five-year, five-year forward nominal interest rates(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon five-year, five-year forward rates derived from government bonds.
(b) An estimate based on French and German government bonds.
–
Change in implied
 inflation rates
Change in real rates
Change in nominal rates
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
United Kingdom United States Euro area(c)
Percentage points
Chart 1.5 Real rates and implied inflation have fallen
since mid-2015
Contributions to the fall in five-year, five-year forward nominal
interest rates since mid-2015(a)(b)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Zero-coupon five-year, five-year forward rates derived from government bonds. The
contribution of real rates and implied inflation to the change in nominal rates is calculated
using inflation swap rates for the United Kingdom and the euro area and inflation-linked
government bond rates for the United States. These instruments reference the RPI, HICP and
CPI measures of inflation respectively.
(b) Change between the average over June-July 2015 and the fifteen working days to 4 May 2016.
(c) Nominal rate is an estimate based on French and German government bonds.
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
February Report
Sterling ERI
€/£
$/£
Chart 1.6 Sterling has depreciated significantly over the
past six months
Sterling exchange rates
market-based measures will also reflect other factors: for
example, market contacts attribute some of the falls in the
US measures to the illiquidity of inflation-linked bonds relative
to nominal bonds.
Exchange rates
According to market contacts, one factor behind some of the
financial market volatility around the turn of the year, and
that has since diminished, was uncertainty about China’s
exchange rate regime. This, together with concerns about
Chinese growth prospects, had resulted in net private sector
capital outflows from China (Section 1.2). That put downward
pressure on the renminbi and the Chinese authorities
intervened to smooth the depreciation of the currency. In
turn, China’s foreign exchange reserves fell markedly and
some market contacts had been expecting the Chinese
authorities to allow the renminbi to depreciate. Since
February, however, the pace of reserves depletion has fallen
notably. Furthermore, the falls in US short-term interest rates
have been accompanied by a depreciation in the US dollar,
which helped to stabilise the renminbi-US dollar exchange
rate. Market contacts suggest that, as a result, the weight
placed on the possibility that the renminbi would depreciate
sharply has fallen.
Having appreciated steadily during 2013–15, the sterling
effective exchange rate has depreciated significantly over the
past six months. In the run-up to the May Report, sterling was
9% below its peak in November (Chart 1.6). That
depreciation has been broad-based, with sterling falling
against both the US dollar and the euro. As set out in the box
on page 5, the referendum on UK membership of the
European Union is estimated to account for roughly half of
this depreciation.
Commodity prices
Reduced concerns about near-term Chinese growth prospects
and an improvement in risk sentiment are likely to have
helped support the recovery in commodity prices. The prices
of industrial metals and agricultural commodities have risen
by 12% and 4% since February respectively (Chart 1.7). More
substantially, the Brent crude spot oil price has increased by
US$15 per barrel — around 50% — since the February Report,
although it remains around 60% below its peak in June 2014.
Reductions in expected oil supply are also likely to have
supported prices. There were supply disruptions in Nigeria,
Iraq and the United Arab Emirates, and the International
Energy Agency revised down its projections for non-OPEC oil
production in 2016.
Corporate capital markets
Over the past three months, the recovery in oil prices,
together with lower benchmark interest rates, central bank
asset purchases and reduced concerns about growth prospects
(Section 1.2) have supported conditions in corporate capital
markets.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 5
Asset prices and the referendum on
membership of the European Union
As set out in the box on pages 41–43, risks associated with
the 23 June referendum on UK membership of the
European Union are likely to affect asset prices. As this box
sets out, the exchange rate appears to have been most
affected so far. There is much more limited evidence of
effects on interest rates and equity prices.
Exchange rates
Sterling is 9% below its November peak (Chart A), and implied
volatilities from sterling options — measures of perceived risk
around the exchange rate — have increased at maturities
spanning the referendum date. Further, the cost of insuring
against a depreciation compared to an appreciation has
increased markedly, suggesting that market participants place
a relatively large weight on the risk of a significant further
depreciation in sterling following the referendum (Chart B).
Simple regression estimates suggest that only around
1 percentage point of the fall in sterling can be explained by
news in economic data releases and relative interest rates,
consistent with a substantial role for referendum effects.
Indeed, market contacts suggest that a material proportion of
the depreciation has been related to the referendum. One
way of attempting to quantify those effects is by assessing
how the exchange rate has changed in response to
information relating to the referendum, proxied by the
frequency of media references. One such model suggests that
the referendum has accounted for roughly half of the
depreciation in sterling (Chart A).
Interest rates
It is harder to identify a significant impact on UK short-term
market interest rates related to the referendum. Using a
similar approach to quantify the impact of referendum news to
that used above, interest rates appear to have moved little in
response to referendum-related news. This absence of a clear
effect on interest rates might, in part, reflect different views
among market participants about how the referendum
outcome would affect the yield curve: a recent Reuters survey
found that there were mixed views as to how short-term
interest rates would respond in the event of a vote to leave the
European Union. Perhaps consistent with this, uncertainty
around future interest rates appears to have risen: implied
volatilities for short-term interest rates are elevated for
maturities spanning the referendum date.
Equity prices
The impact of the referendum on equity prices is also difficult
to quantify as it is likely to differ significantly across
companies depending on the industry and the regions in which
they generate revenues. A similar approach to quantify the
impact of referendum news to that used above for sterling and
interest rates does not suggest any clear referendum impact.
The equities of UK-focused companies have, however, recently
underperformed the overall FTSE All-Share index, and part of
that underperformance might reflect a referendum effect.
+
–
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
Nov. Jan. Mar. May
Per cent
Sterling ERI
Estimate of the cumulative
 impact of the referendum(a)
90%
 confidence
 intervals
2015 16
Chart A Roughly half of sterling’s depreciation is
estimated to be attributed to the referendum
Cumulative change in sterling since 18 November 2015 and
estimated referendum impact
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Cumulative change in the sterling ERI since 18 November 2015 explained by referendum
news flow in a regression of changes in the ERI on a measure of referendum news flow,
changes in relative short-term interest rates, the VIX and macroeconomic data surprises.
The referendum news flow measure is based on the frequency of Bloomberg news articles
that mention the terms ‘Brexit’ or ‘EU referendum’. As the frequency of news articles does
not separately identify the effect of falls and rises in the perceived likelihood of a leave vote,
information gathered as part of the Bank’s market intelligence activities — along with
implied betting odds, online and telephone polls and risk reversals from sterling option prices
— has been used to identify periods in which the change in news flow was related to falls or
rises in the perceived likelihood of a leave vote, and the sign on the referendum news
measure during those periods adjusted accordingly. Estimating the regression using the
frequency of news articles and a dummy variable for this set of days, confirmed at the 1%
level the statistical significance of the chosen set.
–
5
4
3
2
1
0
One Two Three One Two Three Six One Two Three Five Seven Ten
Percentage points
€/£
$/£
Referendum
Maturity
Greater
 weight on
 large
 sterling
 depreciation
Week(s) Month(s) Year(s)
Chart B Options prices point to a risk of further sterling
depreciation following the referendum
Difference between implied volatilities from call and put options
by currency and maturity(a)
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are for 4 May 2016. The series shows the difference between implied volatilities from
25-delta call and put options.
6 Inflation Report May 2016
Corporate bond spreads have narrowed, particularly for
advanced-economy non-investment grade companies,
although they remain above 2013–15 levels (Chart 1.8). For
energy companies, commodity prices are likely to have played
a significant role: spreads on those companies’ bonds widened
relative to non-energy bond spreads around the turn of the
year as oil prices fell, and their subsequent narrowing — as oil
prices have risen — has been greater. In addition, the ECB’s
announcement that it intends to purchase non-bank
euro-denominated corporate bonds (Table 1.B) will have
helped to narrow spreads on the bonds eligible for the scheme.
That should help to support euro-denominated corporate
bond issuance, a significant proportion of bond financing for
UK companies. It will have also helped to compress spreads,
and will support issuance, in other bond markets that are seen
by investors as close substitutes, such as the sterling bond
market.
Having fallen during 2015 H2, equity prices have also
recovered somewhat (Chart 1.9). For the FTSE All-Share
index, while that recovery was broad-based, it was most
pronounced in the equity prices of mining and quarrying
companies (Chart 1.10), which is likely to reflect the increase
in oil and other commodity prices since February.
Bank funding costs
The recovery in UK bank equity prices has been more limited
than in other sectors (Chart 1.10). Indicative measures of
bank funding spreads — such as senior unsecured bond
spreads and CDS premia — have widened over the past
three months (Chart 1.11). Overall bank funding costs are also
a little higher than in February, as that widening has not been
fully offset by falls in benchmark interest rates. As discussed
in the 2016 Q1 Credit Conditions Review, lenders attributed the
rise in funding spreads to greater uncertainty about the global
economic outlook and weaker investor sentiment about
prospects for banking sector profitability.(1) Uncertainty
associated with the referendum was also reported by some
banks as one factor affecting UK wholesale funding markets.
Overall, conditions in corporate capital markets have
stabilised and should continue to support a recovery in capital
market issuance, bank lending and UK domestic demand
(Section 2). While respondents to the Bank Liabilities Survey
reported that they expected spreads on wholesale funding to
widen a little further in 2016 Q2, a larger more persistent
increase in bank funding costs would be needed to lead to
materially tighter UK credit conditions.(2)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr.
Indices: 2014 = 100
Industrial metals
 prices(a)
Oil price(c)
Agricultural
 prices(a)(b)
February Report
2014 15 16
Chart 1.7 Commodity prices have risen since February
US dollar oil and commodity prices
Sources: Bloomberg, S&P indices, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Calculated using S&P GSCI US dollar commodity price indices.
(b) Total agricultural and livestock S&P commodity index.
(c) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
2012 13 14 15 16
Percentage points
Investment-grade (£)
High-yield
 (emerging markets)
High-yield (US$)
High-yield (€) High-yield (£)

February Report
Chart 1.8 Corporate bond spreads have narrowed
relative to their February peaks
International corporate bond spreads(a)
Source: BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research.
(a) Spreads on government bond yields. Investment-grade bond yields are calculated using an
index of bonds with a rating of BBB3 or above. High-yield corporate bond yields are
calculated using aggregate indices of bonds rated lower than BBB3. Due to monthly index
rebalancing, movements in yields at the end of each month might reflect changes in the
population of securities within the indices.
Jan. July Jan. July Jan.
Indices: 2 January 2014 = 100
February Report
S&P 500
 (right-hand scale)
FTSE All-Share
 (right-hand scale)
Euro Stoxx
 (right-hand scale)
MSCI Emerging Markets
 (right-hand scale)
Shanghai Composite
 (left-hand scale)
2014 15
Index: 2 January 2014 = 100
16
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Chart 1.9 Equity prices have recovered somewhat
International equity prices(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) In local currency terms, except for MSCI Emerging Markets, which is in US dollar terms.
(1) www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/creditconditionsreview/
2016/ccrq116.pdf.
(2) www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/other/monetary/bls/16q1.pdf.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 7
60
70
80
90
100
110
July Oct. Jan. Apr.
Manufacturing (28%) Consumer services (9%)
Mining and quarrying (15%)
Business services (15%)
Construction (3%)
Financials (26%)
FTSE All-Share
February Report
Indices: 1 July 2015 = 100
2015 16
Chart 1.10 The recovery in UK equity prices has been
most pronounced in the energy sector
UK equity indices for selected sectors(a)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Sectors capture around 96% of the FTSE All-Share. Sectoral indices are calculated as an
average of sub-indices of the FTSE All-Share, weighted by daily shares in market
capitalisation. The average weights of each sector in the FTSE All-Share since July 2015 are
shown in parentheses.
+
–
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
2011 12 13 14 15 16
Percentage points
Senior unsecured
 bond spreads(a)
Spread on fixed-rate
 retail bonds(b)
Five-year CDS premia(c)
Covered bond
 spread(d)
February Report
Chart 1.11 Bank funding spreads have widened
Indicative long-term UK bank funding spreads
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Markit Group Limited and Bank calculations.
(a) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to mid-swaps for the
major UK lenders’ five-year euro senior unsecured bonds or a suitable proxy when
unavailable.
(b) Unweighted average of spreads for two-year and three-year sterling fixed-rate retail bonds
over equivalent-maturity swaps. Bond rates are end-month rates and swap rates are
monthly averages of daily rates.
(c) Unweighted average of five-year euro senior CDS premia for the major UK lenders.
(d) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to swaps for the major
UK lenders’ five-year euro-denominated covered bonds or a suitable proxy.
1.2 Global economic developments
Global growth and inflation
Global growth has remained subdued in recent years. Initially,
the recovery in advanced economies was offset by slowing
growth in emerging market economies (EMEs). More recently,
advanced-economy growth has softened (Table 1.C). As
explained in the November 2015 Report, following a period in
which EME growth repeatedly slowed by more than
anticipated, the MPC revised down its estimate of their
medium-term growth prospects. Since then, outturns have
been broadly in line with expectations.
Past falls in oil and other commodity prices (Section 1.1) have
weighed on headline inflation rates globally (Table 1.D). Core
inflation — which excludes food and energy prices — is,
however, also weak in many economies. In part this is likely to
reflect remaining slack and the wider effects of commodity
price falls. Accordingly, a measure of world export price
inflation excluding oil, weighted by UK import shares,
remained subdued at -1.2% in the four quarters to 2015 Q4,
compared to its pre-crisis average rate of around 1%.
Euro area
Having slowed during 2015 H2, euro-area GDP growth picked
up in 2016 Q1 (Table 1.C) to 0.6%, somewhat stronger than
expected three months ago. Euro-area GDP has now
recovered to around its pre-crisis peak (Chart 1.12).
Much of this recovery has been a consequence of strong
export performance during 2010–13. In contrast, over the
past year, domestic demand — supported by falls in
commodity prices, improvements in credit conditions and
accommodative monetary policy — has been the main
contributor to euro-area growth. Domestic demand remains
below its pre-crisis level (Chart 1.12), however, and the
performance has varied starkly across countries: domestic
demand is above its pre-crisis levels in France and Germany,
but it remains lower, in some cases significantly so, in Italy,
Spain, Portugal and Greece.
As activity has recovered, overall spare capacity has
diminished markedly, although in some countries significant
slack probably remains. While the overall euro-area
unemployment rate has continued to decline to a little over
10%, it remains more elevated in some countries. Further,
there is likely to be some slack in average hours and
participation, as well as within companies. In the near term,
euro-area growth is projected to fall back a touch and average
a little below ½% per quarter, as ECB policy easing
(Section 1.1) and a slight easing in fiscal policy continue to
support activity as the boost from the past falls in energy
prices fades. That is likely to be associated with a gradual
absorption of remaining slack.
This remaining slack, together with the past falls in energy
prices, has kept euro-area inflation subdued. Headline
inflation was -0.2% according to the flash estimate for April
(Table 1.D), slightly weaker than expected, while core inflation
was 0.7%, compared with 1.6% on average prior to the crisis.
As past falls in energy prices drop out of the annual
comparison, headline inflation should pick up, but further
increases are likely to be gradual while significant spare
capacity remains.
United States
US GDP growth slowed somewhat during 2015 (Table 1.C).
Alongside lower extraction investment in response to the past
falls in oil prices, this slowing may in part have reflected the
effect of the slowing in EME growth on trade and financial
conditions. The slowing in US activity growth continued into
2016 Q1: growth was just 0.1% on the quarter, weaker than
anticipated in February, largely on account of subdued
consumption growth. Much of that weakness is, however,
expected to be temporary; growth is projected to recover to
0.6% in 2016 Q2.
In contrast to the slowing in activity growth, a range of labour
market indicators remain strong: employment growth has
been robust (Chart 1.13) and, while the unemployment rate
has stabilised at around 5%, the participation rate has picked
up. The combination of slowing activity growth and robust
employment growth has been reflected in productivity growth
of only 0.6% in the four quarters to 2016 Q1, compared with
its pre-crisis average rate of 2.3%. Accordingly, wage growth
has also remained subdued at 2% in Q1 on the Employment
Cost Index measure, compared with its past average of around
3%.
Despite the weakness in nominal wage growth, total real
disposable income growth has been robust, supported both by
employment growth and the past falls in energy prices. This
strength in income growth, combined with weak consumption
growth, was reflected in a rise in the household saving ratio in
Q1. Measures of consumer confidence have held up, however,
so some of this increase in saving is likely to prove temporary.
In addition, as the labour market continues to tighten and
productivity growth recovers, that should help to underpin a
gradual recovery in nominal wage growth. These factors
should support a recovery in activity growth in the near term.
There is a risk, however, that the recent weakness in
productivity growth reflects a more persistently weak
underlying trend, and so activity growth remains sluggish
(Section 5).
Although headline PCE inflation remains subdued — at 0.8%
in the twelve months to March — this largely reflects the past
falls in energy prices (Section 1.1). Core PCE inflation has
picked up quite strongly over the same period to 1.6%
(Table 1.D). Core inflation is expected to pick up further as
8 Inflation Report May 2016
Table 1.C Activity growth across countries slowed in 2015 H2
GDP in selected countries and regions(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier, annualised
 Averages
 1998– 2012– 2014 2015 2015 2016
 2007 13 H1 H2 Q1
United Kingdom 2.9 1.9 2.8 2.1 2.1 1.6
Euro area (39%) 2.3 -0.2 1.0 1.9 1.2 2.2
United States (16%) 3.0 1.9 2.5 2.3 1.7 0.5
China (4%)(b) 10.0 7.7 7.3 7.0 6.9 6.7
Japan (2%) 1.1 1.1 -0.8 1.6 0.2 n.a.
India (2%)(b) n.a. 6.2 7.0 7.1 7.5 n.a.
Russia (1%)(c) 7.8 1.6 -0.7 -4.9 -2.3 n.a.
Brazil (1%) 3.1 2.5 -0.7 -5.7 -6.2 n.a.
UK-weighted world GDP(d) 3.0 1.6 2.1 2.2 1.9 n.a.
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), OECD, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) Real GDP measures. Figures in parentheses are shares in UK goods and services exports in 2014.
(b) Data are four-quarter growth. The earliest observation for India is 2012 Q2.
(c) The earliest observation for Russia is 2003 Q2. Figure for 2015 H2 is based on data to 2015 Q3.
(d) Constructed using data for real GDP growth rates for 146 countries weighted according to their shares in
UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the latest observation is 2015 Q4. For those countries where
data are not yet available, Bank staff’s projections are used.
Table 1.D Inflation remains weak across countries
Inflation in selected countries and regions
Per cent
 Monthly averages 2016
 1998– 2014 2015 2015 2015 Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr.
 2007 H1 Q3 Q4
Annual headline consumer price inflation
United Kingdom 1.6 1.5 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.5 n.a.
Euro area(a) 2.0 0.4 -0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 -0.2 0.0 -0.2
United States(b) 2.0 1.4 0.2 0.3 0.5 1.3 1.0 0.8 n.a.
UK-weighted
world inflation(c) 2.0 1.0 0.4 0.5 0.5 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
Annual consumer price inflation excluding food and energy(d)
United Kingdom 1.2 1.6 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.5 n.a.
Euro area(a) 1.6 0.8 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.8 1.0 0.7
United States(b) 1.8 1.5 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.7 1.7 1.6 n.a.
Sources: Eurostat, IMF WEO, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and
Bank calculations.
(a) Data point for April 2016 is a flash estimate.
(b) Personal consumption expenditure price index inflation. Data point for March 2016 is a preliminary
estimate.
(c) Constructed using data for consumption deflators for 51 countries weighted according to their shares in
UK exports. For the vast majority of countries, the last observation is 2015 Q4. For those countries where
data are not yet available, Bank staff’s projections are used.
(d) For the euro area and the United Kingdom, excludes energy, food, alcoholic beverages and tobacco. For the
United States, excludes food and energy.
the labour market continues to tighten and domestic cost
pressures strengthen.
Emerging market economies
Although EME growth as a whole has slowed gradually over
the past few years, the experience of individual countries has
been varied. Brazil and Russia, for example, have seen sharp
falls in activity since 2014 (Table 1.C), reflecting both lower
commodity prices and country-specific factors. In contrast,
growth in India increased from 7% in 2014 to 7½% in
2015 H2.
One factor that may have weighed on activity growth across
EMEs in recent years is the pattern of international capital
flows.(1) Net private sector capital flows into EMEs have
slowed sharply since 2013 and indicators suggest that 2015
saw the first annual net outflow since 1988. More recently,
capital flows into EMEs appear to have recovered a little: the
Institute of International Finance (IIF) estimates that portfolio
flows into EMEs — net purchases of equities and bonds — were
positive in March and April. These data tend to be volatile but,
were this improvement to persist, it should support financial
conditions. Respondents to the IIF banking sector survey
report that lending conditions remain tighter than over the
past few years.
While some of the slowing in EME growth in recent years is
likely to be cyclical, much of it can be attributed to
demographic trends and a structural slowing in productivity
growth, and is therefore expected to persist. This is
particularly true of China — the largest single destination for
UK exports among EMEs — where these trends have been
behind a steady slowing in GDP growth over the past few
years, from an average of around 10% per year to a little under
7%. Chinese growth in 2015 was, however, slightly stronger
than expected and the Chinese authorities recently
re-emphasised their target to double GDP between 2010 and
2020. These developments, together with the associated
policy measures required to achieve the growth target,
suggest that near-term growth prospects there have
strengthened relative to three months ago. Those
announcements may, however, reduce the emphasis on
rebalancing the economy away from investment and towards
domestic consumption. They are also likely to be associated
with a continued robust expansion in domestic credit: total
social financing increased materially in Q1.
 Section 1 Global economic and financial developments 9
Germany
France
Italy
Ireland(c) Spain
Portugal Greece
Euro area
+
–
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Percentage points
Domestic demand
Imports
Exports
GDP 2015 Q4 (per cent)
Chart 1.12 The extent of the recovery in GDP has varied
across euro-area countries
Contributions to cumulative change in GDP since euro-area
pre-recession peak in selected countries(a)(b)
Sources: Eurostat and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures. Contributions may not sum to the total due to rounding, the
statistical discrepancy and chain-linking.
(b) Pre-recession peak is in 2008 Q1.
(c) Data for Ireland are not calendar adjusted.
+
–
800
600
400
200
0
200
400
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Thousands
Chart 1.13 US employment continues to grow at a
robust rate
Monthly changes in US employment(a)
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
(a) Total non-farm payroll employment. Three-month moving average.
(1) For more details on the impact of capital flows on EMEs see the box on page 7 of the
February 2016 Inflation Report; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/
inflationreport/2016/feb.pdf.
Having been broadly stable during 2015, at around its
historical average rate, quarterly GDP growth slowed a little in
2016 Q1. While some of the slowdown may have been related
to slow global growth (Section 1), there are some signs that
uncertainty relating to the UK referendum on EU membership
has begun to weigh on activity. As explained in the box on
pages 14–15, heightened uncertainty can have a wide range of
effects on spending decisions and growth. Those referendum
effects mean that it is hard to judge how much of the
slowdown reflects a loss of underlying momentum and so may
persist, and how much is likely to unwind if uncertainty
recedes following the referendum. Referendum effects will
also make it harder to interpret economic indicators over the
next few months. This section examines the outlook for
growth through the lenses of the output (Section 2.1) and
expenditure data (Section 2.2 and Section 2.3).
2.1 Output
The preliminary estimate for output growth was 0.4% in
2016 Q1. The MPC’s backcast — which uses survey data and
the pattern of past revisions to anticipate future revisions —
suggests quarterly growth will in time be revised up to 0.5%
(Chart 2.1). That, nevertheless, represents a slight slowing
from 2015, where quarterly growth is expected to have been
stable at around 0.6%. That slowdown appears to have been
relatively broad-based across sectors.
Having risen in 2015, output within the domestic oil and gas
extraction sector fell in 2016 Q1 (Chart 2.2). Strong
investment spending during 2014 has supported production
output, but the more recent steep falls in investment
(Section 2.2), following the fall in oil prices since mid-2014,
will weigh on output in this sector over the medium term.
Manufacturing output also fell in Q1 (Chart 2.2), as weaker
demand for exports weighed on activity. According to
intelligence from the Bank’s Agents, falls in manufacturing
output over the past year have been related to the past
appreciation of sterling, the slowdown in global growth
10 Inflation Report May 2016
Table 2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in February Developments since February
Cost of credit Broadly as expected
• Credit spreads to be broadly flat in
2016.
• Corporate bond spreads have fallen since
February, but household credit spreads
have risen.
Consumer spending Broadly as expected
• Quarterly consumption growth of
around ¾%.
• Quarterly consumption growth was 0.6%
in Q4.
Housing market Broadly as expected
• Mortgage approvals to average around
76,000 a month in 2016 Q3, following
a period of volatility.
• Rates of increase in the main indices of
national house prices to average
around ½% per month.
• Quarterly housing investment growth
to average around ¾%.
• Mortgage approvals for house purchase
averaged 73,000 in Q1. Approvals are
expected to average around 75,000 in
2016 H2.
• Average of Halifax and Nationwide price
indices grew by 0.7% per month in Q1 on
average.
• Quarterly housing investment rose by
2¾% in Q4, but estimates can be volatile.
Investment Weaker than expected
• Quarterly business investment growth
of around 1¼%.
• Business investment fell by 2.0% in Q4.
Quarterly GDP growth softened in 2016 Q1 and is projected to slow somewhat further in Q2 as
recent increases in uncertainty weigh on activity. Exports fell over the second half of 2015, and the
current account deficit widened to 7.0% of GDP. Private final domestic demand growth has
remained resilient in the face of continued global and fiscal headwinds. Real income growth is likely
to slow, however, as the boost from past falls in energy and food prices continues to fade.
2 Demand and output
 Section 2 Demand and output 11
(Section 1) and, within that, a marked decline in demand from
extraction sectors globally. Industry surveys point to a mixed
outlook for manufacturing activity. While the CIPS survey
suggests that activity slowed further in April, the CBI
expectations balance points to above-average growth in Q2.
Construction activity also fell in the first quarter of this year
(Chart 2.2). Preliminary estimates since 2013 have, however,
tended subsequently to be revised up. Construction survey
indicators are around average levels, and housing market
activity — which tends to be associated with construction
output over longer periods — picked up in 2016 Q1
(Section 2.2).
Service sector growth slowed from 0.8% in 2015 Q4 to 0.6%
in Q1, in line with its 2015 average rate. Underlying that,
growth in business-focused service subsectors slowed, while
growth in consumer-focused subsectors remained firm. Some
of the slowing in business services growth in Q1 may in part
have reflected the postponement of commercial real estate
transactions (Section 2.2), IPOs and private equity deals, given
uncertainty surrounding the referendum. In addition,
business-focused service companies are, on average, more
dependent on exports than consumer-facing companies and
the Bank’s Agents report that the external factors affecting
manufacturing activity have also dampened business services
output. In contrast, resilient growth of domestic demand, and
household consumption in particular, has supported consumer
services activity such as retail and motor trade.
Survey indicators suggest that output growth has continued to
slow in the second quarter. That slowing may in part reflect
uncertainty around the forthcoming referendum, which could
build further in May and June. GDP growth is projected to be
0.3% in Q2.
2.2 Domestic demand
On the expenditure side, private sector final domestic demand
growth has been resilient over the past few years despite fiscal
and global headwinds (Table 2.B). The public sector deficit
has narrowed (Chart 2.3), reflecting the continuing fiscal
consolidation, and the current account deficit has widened —
mainly due to lower income on UK-owned foreign assets as
global growth has been subdued (Section 2.3). One
counterpart to these developments has been a fall in the rate
of household saving; the household financial balance — which
captures the difference between saving and investment — has
been in deficit since the end of 2013. The financial balance of
private non-financial corporations (PNFCs) has been more
stable.
These fiscal and global headwinds are likely to persist over the
near term and so the outlook for GDP growth will continue to
depend on domestic private sector spending growth. While
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2012 13 14 15 16
Projection(c)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
Projection of preliminary GDP
 at the time of the February Report(c)
GDP
Estimate implied by the mode
 of the latest backcast(b)
+
–
Chart 2.1 GDP growth was 0.4% in Q1
Output growth and Bank staff’s near-term projections(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measures. GDP is at market prices.
(b) The latest backcast, shown to the left of the vertical line, is a judgement about the path for
GDP in the mature estimate of the data. The observation for 2016 Q2, to the right of the
vertical line, is consistent with the MPC’s central projection.
(c) The magenta diamond shows Bank staff’s central projection for the preliminary estimate of
GDP growth in 2016 Q1 at the time of the February Report. The green diamond shows the
current staff projection for GDP growth in 2016 Q2. The bands on either side of the
diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean squared error
of past Bank staff forecasts for quarterly GDP growth made since 2004.
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2013–14 2015 2016 Q1
Other production (5%)
Construction (6%)
Manufacturing (10%)
Services (79%)
Gross value added (GVA) growth (per cent)
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 2.2 Output growth has slowed since 2014
Contributions to average quarterly GVA growth by output
sector(a)
(a) Chained-volume measures at basic prices. Contributions may not sum to the total due to
rounding. Figures in parentheses are weights in nominal GDP in 2012.
12 Inflation Report May 2016
the past easing in credit conditions should support domestic
private sector spending growth, that growth is likely to be
materially affected in the near term by uncertainty relating to
the referendum.
Household spending
Consumer spending growth picked up over 2013–14
(Chart 2.4), as consumer confidence increased and credit
conditions eased. That was associated with a decline in the
household saving ratio, as households consumed a greater
proportion of their incomes, on average.
Throughout 2015, four-quarter consumer spending growth has
been firm at around 2¾%, supported by a pickup in income
growth (Chart 2.4). Households’ real available income —
excluding income that goes directly to pension schemes —
grew by 3.6% over 2015, above its pre-crisis average of 3.1%.
Strong employment growth has supported total nominal
income growth, even though average wage growth remains
weak (Section 3). Past falls in energy and food prices have
also provided a boost to real incomes.
Consumption growth continues to be supported by the easing
in credit conditions since the financial crisis. Lending and
deposit rates have stabilised at low levels (Chart 2.5) and the
availability of credit has continued to increase: the latest
Credit Conditions Survey indicated a slight rise in the
availability of unsecured loans in 2016 Q1, with expectations
of a further increase in Q2. Increased credit supply has been
met by strong demand for credit, such that consumer credit
growth has been robust. Indicative estimates suggest that a
significant part of consumer credit flows during 2014 and 2015
were for car finance. Strong growth in motor trade in early
2016 suggests that this has probably remained the case.
Survey measures indicate that, while consumer confidence has
eased somewhat, it is close to average levels (Chart 2.6),
which should also support consumption growth. While
households’ confidence in the outlook for the wider economy
appears to have declined the most, confidence in their own
financial positions and their appetite for major purchases —
which have typically been a better guide to spending patterns
over the past — remain relatively buoyant.
Consumption growth is, however, projected to slow in the
near term as the boost to real income growth from falling
energy and food prices continues to fade (Section 4). As
highlighted in the box on pages 14–15, there is a risk that a
period of heightened uncertainty around the referendum
could dampen confidence, prompting households to defer
consumption and increase their savings.
The housing market
Housing investment growth was robust over 2013–14, but
then slowed during 2015 (Table 2.B). The slowdown was
broad-based across new building, improvements to existing
Table 2.B Domestic demand growth was resilient in 2015 H2,
while net trade subtracted from GDP growth
Expenditure components of demand(a)
Percentage changes on a quarter earlier
 Averages
 1998– 2008– 2010– 2013– 2015 2015
 2007 09 12 14 H1 Q3 Q4
Household consumption(b) 0.9 -0.6 0.2 0.6 0.8 0.5 0.6
Private sector investment 0.7 -4.2 1.2 1.6 1.8 0.5 -0.7
of which, business investment(c) 0.5 -2.8 1.5 1.2 1.8 1.3 -2.0
of which, private sector
housing investment 0.8 -7.0 0.8 3.0 1.8 -1.2 2.1
Private sector final domestic
demand 0.8 -1.3 0.4 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.4
Government consumption
and investment(c) 0.8 0.9 -0.1 0.4 0.5 0.6 -0.1
Final domestic demand 0.8 -0.8 0.3 0.8 0.9 0.5 0.3
Change in inventories(d)(e) 0.0 0.2 0.1 -0.1 -0.4 0.6 -0.2
Alignment adjustment(e) 0.0 -0.1 0.0 0.1 -0.3 0.2 0.5
Domestic demand(f) 0.8 -0.7 0.4 0.7 0.2 1.4 0.7
'Economic' exports(g) 1.1 -1.0 0.8 1.0 1.3 -0.4 0.1
'Economic' imports(g) 1.4 -1.1 0.8 1.0 0.5 2.9 0.9
Net trade(e)(g) -0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 -1.1 -0.3
Real GDP at market prices 0.7 -0.7 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.6
Memo: nominal GDP at
market prices 1.3 -0.1 0.9 1.1 0.7 0.6 0.2
(a) Chained-volume measures unless otherwise stated.
(b) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Investment data take account of the transfer of nuclear reactors from the public corporation sector to
central government in 2005 Q2.
(d) Excludes the alignment adjustment.
(e) Percentage point contributions to quarterly growth of real GDP.
(f) Includes acquisitions less disposals of valuables.
(g) Excluding the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC) fraud.
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2007 09 11 13 15
Percentages of nominal GDP
Government(b)
Households(a)
Private non-financial corporations
Current account
+
–
Chart 2.3 The household financial balance has fallen
into deficit over recent years
Financial balances by sector
(a) Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(b) Excludes public corporations.
 Section 2 Demand and output 13
properties — which together comprised around three quarters
of private sector housing investment in 2015 — and spending
on services associated with property transactions.
The number of housing starts has risen in recent months,
however (Chart 2.7). As a leading indicator for spending on
new building, this may indicate a pickup in spending on that
component of housing investment in coming quarters. That
said, the Bank’s Agents report that investment has been
limited by difficulties in recruiting skilled labour. There is also
a risk that a period of heightened uncertainty around the
referendum curtails investment: house building has been
sensitive in the past to changes in housing market activity and
sentiment.
Housing market activity spiked up sharply in 2016 Q1, with
residential transactions rising by 20% on the quarter, including
a 42% increase in March alone (Chart 2.8). This will have
been accompanied by a rise in spending associated with
property transactions — such as estate agent and legal fees —
and therefore a steep rise in overall housing investment in Q1.
As described in the February Report, the pre-announced rise in
the stamp duty rate on additional properties, which took
effect in April, is likely to have led to some buy-to-let and
other transactions being brought forward at the expense of
transactions later in the year. That pickup was not reflected in
the flow of mortgage approvals, which remained broadly
stable in Q1. While some of that divergence will reflect cash
transactions, it could suggest that a greater-than-usual
proportion of mortgage approvals in Q1 were for transactions
in the same quarter.
With a significant number brought forward ahead of the
changes in stamp duty, transactions — and associated
spending — are likely to have fallen sharply in Q2. Recent
increases in uncertainty (see the box on pages 14–15) may also
be weighing on housing activity.
Looking through any near-term volatility, housing demand is
projected to continue to pick up gradually over the medium
term. Credit conditions appear to have been broadly
unchanged in 2016 Q1 and the pricing and availability of
higher loan to value mortgages has continued to improve in
recent years. The Financial Policy Committee (FPC) and
Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) have taken steps to
insure against the risk of a marked loosening in underwriting
standards that would threaten financial stability. The FPC
made two Recommendations affecting owner-occupied
lending in 2014 and has welcomed the PRA’s plan to issue a
Supervisory Statement that clarifies its expectations for
underwriting standards in the buy-to-let market. While the
reduction in the scope for mortgage interest tax relief from
April 2017 is likely to dampen demand from buy-to-let
investors, some of this is likely to be offset, over time, by
Saving(d)
Prices(c)
Nominal income(b)
Consumption growth (per cent)
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage points
+
–
Chart 2.4 Nominal income growth and low inflation
have supported consumption growth in 2015
Contributions to annual consumption growth(a)
(a) Chained-volume measure, including non-profit institutions serving households.
(b) Household post-tax income excluding flows into employment-related pension schemes.
(c) Measured using the consumption deflator (including non-profit institutions serving
households).
(d) Household saving out of available income, as defined in footnote (b).
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2006 08 10 12 14 16
New fixed-rate
 time deposit(b)
Per cent
£10,000 unsecured loan
Two-year fixed-rate
 mortgage,
 90% loan to value
Two-year
 fixed-rate mortgage,
 75% loan to value
Chart 2.5 Household interest rates have stabilised at
low levels
Household deposit and lending interest rates(a)
(a) Sterling-only end-month quoted rates, unless otherwise stated. The Bank’s interest rate
series are weighted average rates from a sample of banks and building societies with
products meeting the specific criteria (see www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/iadb/
notesiadb/household_int.aspx). Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Average monthly effective rate.
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
1997 2000 03 06 09 12 15
Major purchases(b)
Differences from averages since 1997 (number of standard deviations)
General economic
 situation expectations(a)
Personal financial situation expectations(a)
+
–
Chart 2.6 Consumer confidence has eased
Measures of consumer confidence
Source: GfK (research carried out on behalf of the European Commission).
(a) Net balance of respondents reporting that they expect their personal financial situation or
the general economic situation to improve over the next twelve months.
(b) Net balance of respondents reporting that, in view of the general economic situation, now is
the right time for people to make major purchases such as furniture or electrical goods.
14 Inflation Report May 2016
Uncertainty and GDP growth
There will always be uncertainty about the future and
households, companies and policymakers are constantly
making choices and decisions in that context. But there may
at times be more doubt than usual — the outlook may be
particularly uncertain. This box examines the relationship
between uncertainty and GDP. It first discusses the
measurement of uncertainty before going on to assess the
channels through which it may affect spending.
Indicators of uncertainty
Uncertainty cannot be directly observed but there are a range
of indicators that may be useful proxies. While each may have
its own drawbacks, statistical techniques can then be applied
to capture the degree of commonality across the different
measures. The principal component of one range of
uncertainty measures suggests that uncertainty has increased
over the past year to above-average levels (Chart A).
One indicator of the degree of economic uncertainty is the
number of citations in the media of phrases that may be
associated with uncertainty. One such measure indicates that
uncertainty has risen particularly sharply in recent months
(Chart B), with the majority of these media references having
been associated with the UK referendum on EU membership.
Uncertainty can also be proxied by financial market measures,
such as implied volatilities. As explained in the box on page 5,
sterling implied volatility, a measure of uncertainty around the
sterling exchange rate, has risen in recent months (Chart B).
While some of that pickup may have reflected greater global
uncertainty earlier in the year (Section 1), that would also have
been reflected in equity market implied volatility, which has
since fallen back. As with media citations, much of the rise in
sterling implied volatility appears to have been associated with
the referendum.
Consumer confidence indicators can be used as a guide to
households’ perceptions of uncertainty. The GfK consumer
confidence survey does not directly ask households how
uncertain they are, although it does measure their
expectations for future income and unemployment prospects
across the broader economy, both of which are likely to be
affected by their degree of uncertainty. Households’
expectations of their personal future financial situation are
presently above average, and their expectations for
UK unemployment are below average (Chart B). Households
do appear, however, to have recently taken a more pessimistic
view on the outlook for the overall state of the economy
(Section 2.2).
Business survey measures indicate that firms’ uncertainty has
increased. The proportion of firms reporting that uncertainty
about demand is likely to limit future investment, as captured
by the CBI surveys, has risen (Chart B), although within that
uncertainty appeared to recede a little for manufacturing firms
in Q1. Respondents to the 2016 Q1 Deloitte CFO Survey
reported their level of uncertainty to be at its highest in
three years.
Heightened uncertainty may also be reflected in a greater
diversity of views about the economic outlook. A wider spread
of external forecasts may therefore give an indication that
uncertainty has increased. The standard deviation of GDP
growth forecasts submitted to Consensus Economics is
currently lower than its past average (Chart B), but this
measure only considers the spread of forecasters’ central
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1991 95 99 2003 07 11 15
Differences from averages since 1991 (number of standard deviations)
Principal component(b)
Range of uncertainty
 indicators(a)
+
–
Chart A Uncertainty has risen in recent months
Range of uncertainty measures
Sources: Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, Dow Jones Factiva, GfK (research on behalf of the
European Commission), Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Range includes: the average standard deviation of monthly Consensus Economics forecasts
for GDP one and two years ahead, seasonally adjusted by Bank staff; the number of media
reports citing uncertainty in four national broadsheet newspapers; survey responses of
households to questions relating to their personal financial situation and unemployment
expectations; and the three-month implied volatility for the FTSE 100 and twelve-month
implied volatility for sterling ERI — realised volatilities have been used prior to April 1992 and
September 2001 respectively. A higher number indicates greater uncertainty.
(b) The first principal component extracted from the set of indicators.
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2012 13 14 15 16
Differences from averages since 1991 (number of standard deviations)
Consensus
 forecasts
Media citations
Sterling ERI
 implied volatility
Consumer confidence:
 financial situation (inverted)
Consumer confidence:
 unemployment
 expectations
FTSE implied
 volatility
Investment intentions:
 uncertainty over demand
+
–
Chart B Individual measures of uncertainty have
followed different paths
Indicators of uncertainty(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, CBI, Consensus Economics, Dow Jones Factiva, GfK (research on behalf of
the European Commission), Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) Includes CBI measures of demand uncertainty as a factor likely to limit capital expenditure
for manufacturing and services — excluding distribution and financial services — weighted
together using shares in value added. Other indicators are as described in footnote (a) to
Chart A.
 Section 2 Demand and output 15
expectations and not the range that each individual forecaster
places around their own central forecast.
How could uncertainty affect GDP growth?
An increase in uncertainty is likely to weigh on growth through
a number of channels; and changes in GDP growth may
themselves affect the degree of uncertainty.(1) For example, a
sharp fall in GDP could be associated with uncertainty around
the extent to which it will recover.
Households are likely to react to increased uncertainty by
increasing savings — and so reducing consumption — for a
period, to provide themselves a buffer in the event of a
negative outcome, such as becoming unemployed. The degree
to which households increase their savings will depend on a
number of factors, including how long any period of
uncertainty is expected to last.
There are a number of ways that firms may respond to
increased uncertainty. Most obviously, firms could choose to
delay some investment spending until uncertainty recedes.
The same will be true for other decisions that have a long-term
pay-off, such as decisions to enter new markets or not.
Similarly, uncertainty could also affect recruitment decisions:
firms could reduce new hires and choose to operate with a
smaller workforce until uncertainty recedes; or, alternatively,
additional temporary workers could be perceived as preferable
to more costly and irreversible capital investment.
Uncertainty can also affect asset prices. Investors would
probably require additional compensation in the face of a
persistent increase in uncertainty to cover the greater range of
possible outcomes. Such an increase in risk premia would
increase the cost of raising finance from capital markets,
affecting some firms directly, and could also put downward
pressure on the exchange rate. It could also increase the cost
of bank funding, which if passed through to interest rates on
borrowing would affect households and companies more
broadly and would be likely to amplify the effects described
above.
Different views of uncertainty across households, firms and
financial market participants could mean that some channels
are more important than others at any one time. The extent
and duration of any uncertainty effects on GDP are also likely
to vary depending on the nature of the event driving the
change in uncertainty. Moreover, the effects of uncertainty on
spending may persist for some time even after uncertainty
recedes, as it can take time for companies and households to
reassess their spending decisions and restart spending projects
after a period of increased uncertainty.
(1) For details of one model that attempts to estimate the relationship between
uncertainty and GDP see Haddow, A, Hare, C, Hooley, J and Shakir, T (2013),
‘Macroeconomic uncertainty: what is it, how can we measure it and why does it
matter?’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 53, No. 2, pages 100–09;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2013/
qb1302.pdf.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2000 03 06 09 12 15
£ billions
Investment in new
 dwellings(a)
 (left-hand scale)
Thousands per quarter
Housing starts(b)
 (right-hand scale)
Housing completions(b)
 (right-hand scale)
Chart 2.7 Housing starts and completions continue to
rise
House building and investment in new dwellings
Sources: Department for Communities and Local Government, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chained-volume measure. Excludes improvements to existing dwellings.
(b) Number of permanent dwellings financed and built by private developers. Private
permanent dwelling starts in Wales are assumed to grow in line with Welsh total permanent
dwelling starts since 2011 Q2. UK data for 2015 Q3 and 2015 Q4 have been grown in line
with data for England. Data have been seasonally adjusted by Bank staff.
increased demand from existing and potential
owner-occupiers.
Overall, however, the outlook for housing market activity is
judged to be somewhat weaker than projected three months
ago. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents suggest that there has
been a structural shift in the housing market in recent years, in
part reflecting the increasing average age of the population, as
older people tend to move less frequently. That means that
housing activity relating to existing owner-occupiers is likely
to remain some way below its pre-crisis average level.
A consequence of the past pickup in housing demand, along
with a limited supply of homes available for sale, has been
robust house price inflation since 2013. The average of the
Halifax and Nationwide measures of house prices increased by
7.5% in the four quarters to 2016 Q1. That pace is projected
to moderate slightly to around 6½% over the rest of 2016.
Corporate spending
Following the sharp falls during the recession, business
investment growth has rebounded strongly over the past few
years (Table 2.B). Business investment fell in 2015 Q4, but
that was accounted for by a steep drop in extraction sector
investment and large disposals of transport equipment.
16 Inflation Report May 2016
Excluding extraction investment, business investment grew by
6½% in the four quarters to 2015 Q4, broadly in line with its
average rate since 2014 (Chart 2.9). Investment data are,
however, more volatile and prone to revision than other
components of expenditure (Chart 2.10).
Extraction investment fell by around 40% in the four quarters
to 2015 Q4, subtracting 3½ percentage points from total
business investment growth (Chart 2.9). As explained in the
February Report, significant cuts to extraction investment
following the fall in oil prices had been anticipated. The fall in
Q4 was, however, even greater than projected. In line with
intelligence from the Bank’s Agents and industry sources, the
overall projected decline in extraction investment over the
medium term is unchanged. So the remaining decline in
investment over the MPC’s forecast period is somewhat
smaller. Extraction investment is projected to reduce the level
of overall business investment by a further 2½% by 2018.
Improving financing conditions have helped to support
business investment growth. The Bank’s Agents report that
access to finance has improved over the past few years, and
the total amount of finance raised by companies continued to
pick up in Q1 (Table 2.C). After rising around the turn of the
year, corporate bond spreads have narrowed since the
February Report (Section 1) and, as discussed in the latest
Credit Conditions Review, there are few signs of any tightening
in bank lending conditions.
Some major UK lenders have, however, reported a recent
softening in demand for loans by some large companies. In
part this appears to reflect a drop in refinancing, rather than
net external finance in total. But loan demand may also
have been affected by increased uncertainty. Having
picked up around the turn of the year, growth in lending to
UK non-financial businesses, particularly to large companies,
has since fallen back (Chart 2.11).
The commercial real estate (CRE) market has also slowed,
which may weigh on business investment growth. According
to Property Archive data, the value of secondary market
CRE transactions fell by around 40% in 2016 Q1, contributing
to a 55% fall on a year ago. While the latest fall may have
been associated with uncertainty ahead of the referendum,
the Agents’ contacts also report that global uncertainty —
alongside some perceptions that CRE prices may be around
their peak in some areas — has depressed activity over a more
sustained period. While only a small proportion of investment
spending is associated with CRE transactions, Bank staff
estimate that around a quarter reflects spending on new and
existing buildings. While this is not directly related to the
number of transactions, there is a risk that broader sentiment
dampens such spending over the near term.
Thousands per month
Housing transactions(a)
Mortgage approvals
 for house purchase
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Chart 2.8 Housing transactions rose sharply in March
Mortgage approvals for house purchase and housing transactions
Sources: Bank of England and HM Revenue and Customs.
(a) Number of residential property transactions for values of £40,000 or above.
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Total
Excluding extraction(b)
Percentage changes on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 2.9 Extraction investment has recently depressed
overall business investment growth
Business investment(a)
(a) Chained-volume measures.
(b) Total business investment less investment within the mining and quarrying sector.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0 2 4 6 8
More prone to revision
More volatile
Standard deviation(c)
Government
 consumption
Household
 consumption
Investment
Imports
Exports
Root mean squared revision(b)
Chart 2.10 Investment data are more volatile and prone
to revision than other expenditure components
Volatility of, and degree of past revisions to, growth in
expenditure components(a)
(a) Four-quarter growth in chained-volume measures between 1993 and 2010. The size of each
circle represents the component’s share of 2015 nominal GDP.
(b) The root mean square of revisions between the first estimate and estimates published five
years later.
(c) Standard deviation of the estimates published five years later.
 Section 2 Demand and output 17
Business investment is projected to continue to grow over the
near term, but heightened economic and financial uncertainty,
in part related to the EU referendum, is expected to weigh on
growth over the first half of 2016. Respondents to the
Deloitte CFO Survey reported a sharp pickup in uncertainty in
Q1, with related cuts to investment plans. As explained in the
box on pages 14–15, there is a risk that a period of heightened
uncertainty dampens capital spending more persistently.
Government spending
The MPC’s forecasts are conditioned on the Government’s tax
and spending policies, which imply a continued fiscal
consolidation. Announcements in the March Budget had
broadly offsetting effects on projected public sector net
borrowing over the next three years. One exception is a delay
to the policy to bring forward large firms’ corporation tax
payments. This policy will affect the timing but not the size of
their overall tax payments, and so its delay and eventual
implementation are not expected to have a discernible effect
on corporate spending.
Despite the past fiscal consolidation, real government
consumption has been relatively stable (Table 2.B). That is
likely, in part, to be because around two thirds of real
government consumption is measured directly using indicators
of output — such as the number of hospital operations — that
do not fluctuate as much as changes in cash spending.
The outlook for inflation, however, depends on the public
sector’s use of resources rather than estimates of real
government output. For example, lower spending on wages
and salaries and procurement will dampen households’ and
companies’ income growth, even if they have little direct
effect on measured real government output. The overall
implications for GDP growth and inflation will depend on how
firms and households adjust their spending in response, which
in turn will depend on a range of factors, including the
distribution of changes to incomes and the extent to which
changes to future fiscal policy were anticipated, and therefore
have already been reflected in saving and spending decisions.
2.3 Net trade and the current account
Having been broadly flat in previous years, net trade dragged
on GDP growth in the second half of 2015 (Table 2.B). That
was mainly due to strong import growth, although exports fell
slightly. Import and export data are, however, relatively
volatile components of spending, and are also subject to
significant revision (Chart 2.10).
The strength in import growth over the past year has partly
reflected resilient domestic demand growth (Section 2.2), but
the share of imports in demand has also increased. That
increasing share may have been driven by the past falls in
sterling import prices following the appreciation in sterling
Table 2.C Net finance raised by companies continued to rise in
2016 Q1
Net finance raised by PNFCs(a)
£ billions
 Quarterly averages
 2003–08 2009–12 2013–14 2015 2016 Q1
Loans 11.6 -6.2 -1.5 1.3 6.1
Bonds(b)(c) 2.9 3.3 3.0 3.1 9.2
Equities(b) -2.1 1.3 0.2 1.1 0.4
Commercial paper(b) 0.0 -0.4 -0.3 1.5 1.2
Total(d) 12.9 -2.0 1.4 6.4 14.7
(a) Includes sterling and foreign currency funds from UK monetary financial institutions and capital markets.
(b) Non seasonally adjusted.
(c) Includes stand-alone and programme bonds.
(d) As component series are not all seasonally adjusted, the total may not equal the sum of its components.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
2013 14 15 16
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Large businesses(c)
All UK non-financial businesses
SMEs(b)
+
–
Chart 2.11 Growth in bank lending to companies fell
back in March
Lending to UK non-financial businesses(a)
(a) Rate of growth in the stock of lending. Lending by UK monetary financial institutions. Data
cover lending in sterling and foreign currency, expressed in sterling. Non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are those businesses with annual debit account
turnover on the main business account less than £25 million.
(c) Large businesses are those with annual debit account turnover on the main business account
over £25 million.
18 Inflation Report May 2016
(Section 4). Import growth is projected to slow over the near
term, as higher import prices following the recent depreciation
in sterling stem further import substitution, and growth
continues to slow in some of the more import-intensive
components of demand, such as extraction investment
(Section 2.2).
The fall in exports in the second half of 2015 (Table 2.B)
coincided with the slowing in global growth (Section 1).
UK export prices have fallen in sterling terms, which has been
reflected in a sharper fall in the value of exports (Chart 2.12).
While lower prices will have supported demand for exports,
they will have also depressed profit margins, which may have
reduced the scope for exporters to increase their output
volumes in response. The recent depreciation in sterling and a
modest pickup in global demand (Section 5) are projected to
support export activity over the near term. Export growth is,
however, projected to remain below import growth, and so
net trade is expected to exert a small drag on GDP growth
over the MPC’s forecast period.
In part due to the deteriorating nominal trade balance, the
current account deficit widened from 4.3% of GDP in Q3 to
7.0% in Q4 (Chart 2.13), the largest quarterly deficit since
records began in 1955. The largest contribution to that
widening was from a larger deficit on primary income — net
payments on foreign direct and portfolio investment.
The primary income balance has fallen significantly since 2011,
and has generally been in deficit since mid-2012. Much of the
decline reflects lower net income on foreign direct
investments (FDI), particularly within the European Union.
ONS analysis suggests that lower incomes have been
concentrated within a small number of large multinationals
and that developments in the extraction sector have
contributed to the overall deterioration. The ONS anticipates
that estimates of the FDI income deficit will narrow by around
½% of GDP in 2013 and 2014 following revisions in the
forthcoming Pink Book to be published in June, although it is
not yet clear what that implies for 2015 and beyond.
Despite the widening in the current account deficit, official
estimates of the net international investment position (NIIP)
— the stock of the United Kingdom’s holdings of foreign assets
net of liabilities — improved during the final quarter of 2015,
as the revaluation of existing assets and liabilities offset the
effects of the weaker flows.(1)
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2013 14 15
Export volumes(b)
Value of exports(c)
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Import volumes(b)
Value of
 imports(c)
+
–
Chart 2.12 Import and export values have fallen over
the past year
Imports and exports(a)
(a) Excluding the impact of MTIC fraud.
(b) Chained-volume measures.
(c) At current market prices.
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
2006 09 12 15
Secondary income
Primary income
Trade balance
Current account balance
Percentages of nominal GDP
+
–
Chart 2.13 The current account deficit widened in
2015 Q4
UK current account
(1) For a discussion of the increasing role of financial flows for the current account and
revaluation effects for the net international investment position, see Forbes, K (2016),
‘The UK current account deficit: risky or risk-sharing?’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech890.pdf.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 19
Table 3.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in February Developments since February
Unemployment Higher than expected
• Headline LFS unemployment rate to fall
to slightly below 5% by mid-2016.
• The unemployment rate remained at
5.1% in the three months to February.
Participation Broadly as expected
• The labour market participation rate to
remain broadly flat over 2016 H1.
• Participation was stable at 63½% in the
three months to February.
Average hours Higher than expected
• Average hours worked to fall by around
½% by mid-2016.
• Average hours worked rose in 2015 Q4
but have fallen back slightly more
recently.
Productivity Lower than expected
• Hourly labour productivity to increase
by around 1% in 2016 H1.
• Hourly labour productivity growth fell in
Q4, though it is expected to have risen by
0.7% in Q1.
Earnings growth Broadly as expected
• Four-quarter AWE growth to remain
broadly flat at around 2% over 2016 H1.
• Four-quarter AWE growth was 1.8% in
the three months to February, reflecting
the effect of weak bonuses.
There are currently two key issues around the outlook for the
labour market and supply. One is labour productivity. In recent
years, supply growth has been largely accounted for by strong
employment growth and an increase in average hours. As the
labour market has tightened, employment growth has slowed
and average hours are likely to fall (Section 3.1). In order for
supply growth to be maintained, productivity growth will need
to recover further. Having picked up in 2014, it fell back
somewhat last year, however. The other key issue is wage
growth. Despite the apparent absorption of slack in the labour
market (Section 3.2), wage growth remains weak (Chart 3.1).
While most of that is likely to reflect the weakness in
productivity, other factors, such as the low level of headline
inflation, may also have weighed on wage growth. The outlook
for wages will depend on how persistent those factors prove to
be (Section 3.3).
3.1 Labour market developments and
productivity
Having been well above its pre-crisis average rate during most
of 2014–15, employment growth slowed markedly in the three
months to February (Table 3.B). Reflecting the past strength in
employment growth, however, the 16+ employment rate — the
proportion of the population over the age of 16 in employment
— remains close to its previous peak (Chart 3.2). That is despite
a drag from demographic trends: the increasing average age of
the population, and hence the increasing share of people in
retirement, would be normally associated with a declining
employment rate. Acting against this demographic drag, the
16–64 employment rate is at its highest level on record.
Some of the slowing in employment growth is likely to have
reflected the broader normalisation in the labour market in
recent years as spare capacity has been absorbed (Section 3.2),
and may also have reflected the softening in output growth
since 2014 (Section 2). More recently, as explained in the box
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
456789
2001–07
2008–09
2010–12
2013
2014
2015–16 Q1(b)
Unemployment rate, per cent
Regular pay growth,(a) per cent
(a) Whole-economy total pay excluding bonuses and arrears of pay. Percentage change on a
year earlier.
(b) 2016 Q1 shows data for the three months to February.
Chart 3.1 Wage growth has been weak relative to the
unemployment rate
Wage Phillips curve: wages and unemployment
3 Supply and the labour market
Employment has grown at a strong pace in recent years and the unemployment rate has declined to
around its pre-crisis average. Wage growth, however, has remained relatively weak. That is likely
predominantly to reflect slow productivity growth but, more recently, a drag from the low level of
headline inflation has probably also weighed on wage growth. It is possible, though, that a range of
other factors, such as a fall in the equilibrium rate of unemployment and softer inflation
expectations, have also dampened wage growth. As the factors weighing on wage growth dissipate,
it is projected to pick up towards its pre-crisis average rate.
20 Inflation Report May 2016
Table 3.B Employment growth has slowed
Employment growth, vacancies and survey indicators of employment
intentions
 Quarterly averages
 2000– 2010– 2013 2014 2015 2016
 07(a) 12 Q1
Employment growth(b) 70 67 95 152 130 20
of which, employees(b) 55 33 62 139 95 -23
of which, self-employed and other(b)(c) 16 35 33 14 35 43
Vacancies to labour force ratio(d) 2.09 1.48 1.66 2.04 2.25 2.27
Surveys of employment intentions(e)
BCC(f) 18.6 8.1 21.9 29.2 25.1 24.4
CBI(f) 5.4 -0.4 13.8 26.7 18.9 20.1
Agents(g) 0.8 0.3 0.4 1.3 1.0 0.4
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS (including the Labour Force Survey) and Bank calculations.
(a) Unless otherwise stated.
(b) Changes relative to the previous quarter in thousands. Figures for 2016 Q1 are data for the three months to
February 2016.
(c) Other comprises unpaid family workers and those on government-supported training and employment
programmes classified as being in employment.
(d) Excludes vacancies in agriculture, forestry and fishing. Average is 2001 Q2 to 2007. Figure for 2016 Q1
shows vacancies in March relative to the economically active population in the three months to February.
(e) Measures for the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the
CBI (manufacturing, financial services and business/consumer/professional services) are weighted together
using employee jobs shares from Workforce Jobs. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
(f) Net percentage balance of companies expecting their workforce to increase over the next three months.
(g) End-quarter observation. The scores refer to companies’ employment intentions over the next six months.
The scores are on a scale of -5 to +5.
50
55
60
65
70
75
1972 78 84 90 96 2002 08 14
Per cent
16–64
16+
0
(a) Percentages of population.
Chart 3.2 The employment rate is close to previous peaks
Employment rates for selected age groups(a)
31.0
31.5
32.0
32.5
33.0
33.5
35.0
35.5
36.0
36.5
37.0
37.5
2004 06 08 10 12 14 16
Hours Hours
Average weekly usual hours(a)
 (right-hand scale)
0.0 0.0
Average weekly actual hours(b)
 (left-hand scale)
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Usual hours exclude leave taken and other temporary variations in hours. Data are to
2015 Q4.
(b) The diamond shows data for the three months to February.
Chart 3.3 Average hours worked have been volatile
Weekly hours worked: actual and usual
on pages 14–15, increased uncertainty is likely to be affecting
companies’ recruitment decisions and may have already started
to weigh on employment growth in the three months to
February. Survey indicators of employment intentions,
however, are mixed and on average point to only a slight
slowing in employment growth compared to recent years
(Table 3.B).
Average hours worked in the three months to February were
stronger than expected at the time of the February Report
(Table 3.A). These data have, however, been volatile over the
past year; average usual hours worked have been more stable
(Chart 3.3). That difference mainly reflects fluctuations in the
amount of leave taken and average hours worked are therefore
expected to fall back in the coming quarters. Average hours
worked are projected to decline gradually over the coming years
as the average age of the workforce continues to rise.(1)
Overall, since 2013, growth in total hours worked has eased
back and productivity has accounted for a greater share of
output growth (Chart 3.4). Productivity growth remains
relatively subdued, however. Four-quarter growth has averaged
0.6% since 2013, compared with 2.1% prior to the crisis
(Chart 3.5). Productivity fell sharply in 2015 Q4, and by more
than anticipated, with only some of that weakness expected to
unwind.
Productivity growth will be a key determinant of the sustainable
rate of output growth. As discussed in the February Report,
there are a number of factors that are likely to have weighed on
productivity growth, such as impaired resource allocation, that
are expected to dissipate gradually, supporting a pickup in
productivity growth. Moreover, the United Kingdom’s
productivity performance since the crisis has been weaker than
that of some other countries, such as the United States and
France. Historically, UK productivity had gradually converged
towards that in more productive countries, in part as UK firms
adopted new practices and technologies.(2) To the extent to
which scope for such catch-up remains, that should support
UK productivity growth. Reflecting all of these factors,
productivity is projected to grow at a faster rate over the MPC’s
forecast horizon than over the past three years (Section 5).
Supply will also be determined by the extent to which people
want to participate in the workforce. The participation rate has
been fairly stable over the past two years at around 63½% and
is projected to remain so, contributing little to overall supply
growth. That stable outlook for the participation rate reflects
two large offsetting factors. As older people typically have a
lower participation rate, the rising average age of the
(1) For more details see the box on pages 22–23 of the February 2016 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/feb.pdf.
(2) For a cross-country comparison of productivity and a discussion of productivity
catch-up see Weale, M (2014), ‘The UK productivity puzzle: an international
perspective’;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech785.pdf.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 21
population is expected to weigh on the overall participation
rate. Offsetting that, however, the participation rate among
older people has been increasing steadily and is expected to
continue to rise.(1) As discussed in the February Report, there
are risks in both directions around the outlook for
participation among older people and hence around the
participation rate in aggregate.
3.2 Labour market slack and capacity
utilisation
The balance between supply and demand — the degree of
slack in the economy — is an important determinant of
inflationary pressure.
There is limited evidence of labour market slack in the degree
of labour force participation, or the amount of hours worked.
The proportion of people aged 16–64 who report having been
discouraged from participating in the labour force is below its
pre-crisis average. And the share of part-time workers who
would prefer a full-time role has continued to decline, both as
some people have moved into full-time roles and as some now
prefer part-time work.
Another component of labour market slack is unemployment.
Consistent with the strength in labour demand, the
unemployment rate has declined over the past three years,
but has been stable more recently and was 5.1% in the three
months to February (Chart 3.6). Bank staff estimate that the
unemployment rate is close to its equilibrium; in other words,
that there is little remaining slack in unemployment and
further significant falls would be associated with excess
inflationary pressure in the medium term. There is, however,
uncertainty around this judgement.
On the one hand, the continued weakness in wage growth in
the face of the decline in the unemployment rate (Section 3.3)
could suggest that there are factors that have pushed the
equilibrium rate below that currently estimated. Indeed, the
rising average age of the workforce and increased degree of
educational attainment over the past two decades are
characteristics that have tended to be associated with lower
unemployment rates and so could have lowered the
equilibrium rate. In addition, some changes in government
policy, such as to welfare payments, over recent decades may
have lowered the equilibrium rate by increasing the incentive
and ability to move from unemployment into employment.
On the other hand, the long-term unemployment rate
remains above its pre-crisis average (Chart 3.7) despite the
high level of vacancies (Table 3.B). This could indicate that
the pool of unemployed people may currently be less
well-suited to the available jobs than prior to the crisis,
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Percentage points
Hourly productivity(a)(b)
Total hours worked(b)
GDP (per cent)(a)
+
_
(a) Chained-volume measure, based on the backcast for the final estimate of GDP. Percentage
change on a year earlier.
(b) Adjusted for expected revisions to the Labour Force Survey to incorporate the latest ONS
population estimates and projections. Lighter-coloured bars show Bank staff forecasts for
2016 Q1.
Chart 3.4 Over the past year productivity growth has
accounted for a greater share of GDP growth
Decomposition of four-quarter GDP growth
+
–
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Output per worker
Output per hour
(a) GDP is based on the backcast for the final estimate of GDP. Labour market data have been
adjusted for expected revisions to the Labour Force Survey to incorporate the latest ONS
population estimates and projections. The diamonds show Bank staff forecasts for 2016 Q1.
Chart 3.5 Productivity has grown at a modest pace
Measures of labour productivity(a)
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
2012 13 14 15 16
Per cent
Projection
Three-month
 unemployment rate
Monthly projections
 in February
0.0
Sources: Labour Force Survey (LFS) and Bank calculations.
(a) The magenta diamonds show Bank staff’s central projections for the headline
unemployment rate for December 2015, January, February and March 2016, at the time of
the February Report. The green diamonds show the current staff projections for the headline
unemployment rate for March, April, May and June 2016. The bands on either side of the
diamonds show uncertainty around those projections based on one root mean squared error
of past Bank staff forecasts for the three-month LFS unemployment rate.
Chart 3.6 The unemployment rate has been stable
Unemployment rate and Bank staff’s near-term projection(a)
(1) For more information on the participation rate see the box on pages 30–31 of the
November 2014 Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2014/ir14nov.pdf.
22 Inflation Report May 2016
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Nominal wages
Real wages(a)
+
–
(a) Deflated by CPI.
Chart 3.9 Real wage growth is close to its past average
rate
Average weekly earnings: real and nominal
suggesting there is a greater degree of mismatch in the labour
market. If the long-term unemployment rate were to stabilise
at its current rate, that could imply a higher equilibrium
unemployment rate than currently estimated.
Overall spare capacity in the economy depends on both the
amount of slack in the labour market and the degree of spare
capacity in firms. Survey indicators suggest that companies’
capacity pressures eased in 2016 Q1 (Chart 3.8). Those
pressures are likely to have moderated further in Q2, in line
with the easing in output growth (Section 2).
Reflecting that easing in capacity pressures, alongside
evidence from the indicators discussed above and top-down
statistical estimates, the MPC’s best collective judgement is
that weak activity growth in 2016 Q2 will be associated with a
slight widening in slack.(1)
3.3 Wages
Four-quarter average pay growth eased to 1.8% in the three
months to February (Chart 3.9). This slowing reflected
volatility in bonus payments, in particular in the financial
sector, which may not be a good indicator of underlying wage
pressures. Stripping out bonuses, regular pay grew by 2.2% in
the three months to February (Table 3.C), compared with
1.9% in the three months to November, broadly as expected
in the February Report.
While the fall in the unemployment rate over the past
three years appears to have been associated with some pickup
in wage growth, wage growth remains weak relative to its past
relationship with unemployment (Chart 3.1). The outlook for
wages will depend on the nature and persistence of the factors
weighing on wage growth.
As discussed above, one possibility is that there has been a
change in the underlying relationship between wage growth
and unemployment. For example, the equilibrium
unemployment rate may have declined, leading to greater
slack in the labour market (Section 3.2). If so, the
unemployment rate would need to fall further for labour
market slack to be absorbed and wage pressures to normalise.
It is also possible that, for some occupations, an increased
ability to hire people from abroad could have reduced the
sensitivity of wage growth to domestic labour market
conditions.
Subdued productivity growth (Chart 3.5) is likely to have been
the main contributor to the weakness in wage growth in
recent years. In part, that is because changes in the
composition of the workforce are likely to have weighed on
0
1
2
3
4
5
1993 95 97 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Per cent
Under six months
 Six to twelve months
Over twelve months
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The number of people unemployed in each duration category, divided by the economically
active population. Dashed lines are averages from 2002 to 2007.
Chart 3.7 Long-term unemployment remains somewhat
elevated
Unemployment rates by duration(a)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
1999 2003 07 11 15
BCC
Agents
CBI +
–
Differences from 1999 Q1–2007 Q3 averages
(number of standard deviations)
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures are produced by weighting together surveys from the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing
and services), the BCC (non-services and services) and the CBI (manufacturing, financial
services, business/consumer/professional services and distributive trades) using shares in
nominal value added. The surveys are adjusted to have a mean of zero and a variance of one
over 1999 Q1 to 2007 Q3. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted.
Chart 3.8 Companies’ capacity pressures have eased
Survey indicators of capacity utilisation(a)
(1) For more details on top-down statistical estimates of the output gap see
Melolinna, M and Tóth, M (2016), ‘Output gaps, inflation and financial cycles in the
United Kingdom’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 585;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2016/swp585.pdf.
 Section 3 Supply and the labour market 23
both productivity and average pay growth. Roles that tend to
be associated with lower pay, such as lower-skilled positions,
have formed a larger-than-usual share of net employment
growth in recent years. Bank staff, however, estimate that the
drag from these compositional factors on wage growth
diminished during 2015 Q4. More generally as productivity
growth picks up (Section 3.1), this should help to support wage
growth.
The low level of headline inflation (Section 4) also appears to
have weighed on wage growth more recently. Following falls in
the prices of energy, food and other imported goods, real wage
growth has picked up strongly and is close to its pre-crisis
average rate (Chart 3.9). The Bank’s Agents and the CIPD
survey report that this growth in households’ purchasing power
has dampened pressure on employers to raise wages more
quickly, which may have offset some of the effect of the past
tightening in labour market conditions. As the effect of the
external influences weighing on inflation wanes and the
headline rate of inflation picks up (Section 4), employers are
likely to face increased pressure to raise wages, which would be
expected to push up nominal wage growth.
One way low inflation could have a more persistent effect is if
it leads expectations of future inflation to fall and that in turn
weighs on wage growth. Although survey measures of
household inflation expectations rose slightly on average in
2016 Q1, they remain lower than in 2014 (Section 4). There is a
risk that households may continue to be willing to accept
smaller pay rises, even as headline inflation picks up, if they
expect future growth in the cost of living to remain subdued.
In contrast, the National Living Wage (NLW), which came into
effect on 1 April, is likely to push up wages in coming years,
although the effect on average wage growth is projected to be
relatively small. As explained in the box on page 24 of the
August 2015 Report, the NLW will apply on top of the National
Minimum Wage for all employees aged 25 and over. This will
directly affect around three million employees by 2020 but is
also expected to have indirect effects on the pay of people
further up the wage distribution or under the age of 25. Bank
staff estimate that the introduction of the NLW is likely to raise
aggregate wages by around ½% gradually over the next four
years. It will, however, have a greater effect on wages in sectors
with a high share of workers receiving the minimum wage. The
Bank’s Agents report that labour cost expectations in some
industries, such as hospitality, have picked up by more than
average in anticipation of this policy (Chart 3.10).
The MPC’s best collective judgement is that productivity and,
to some extent, low headline inflation have weighed on wage
growth. Overall, survey measures suggest that wage growth is
likely to remain subdued in the near term (Table 3.C). As
productivity growth continues to recover and inflation rises
further, wage growth is projected to rise gradually towards its
pre-crisis average rate (Section 5).
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Scores
All companies
Accommodation and
 food services
Wholesale and
 retail trade
(a) The scores refer to companies’ expectations of labour costs for the year ahead compared
with the previous twelve months; three-month average. Scores of -5 to 5 represent rapidly
falling and rapidly rising respectively, with zero representing no change.
Chart 3.10 The National Living Wage is likely to affect
some sectors more than others
Agents’ company visit scores: average expected change in labour
costs for selected industries(a)
Table 3.C Most survey measures point to little acceleration in
wage growth
Indicators of wage growth
Percentage changes on a year earlier
 Averages
 2002–07 2010–12 2014 2015 2015 2016
 H1 H2 Q1
(1) Total AWE(a) 4.2 2.0 1.2 2.5 2.5 1.8
(2) AWE regular pay(a)(b) 3.9 1.8 1.3 2.6 2.2 2.2
(1)–(2) Bonus
contribution(a)(c) 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.3 -0.4
Pay settlements(d) 3.2 1.7 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.2
Survey indicators of pay growth
CBI(e) n.a. 1.6 2.0 2.1 2.5 2.3
REC(f) 56.7 52.4 63.1 63.1 60.7 58.9
Agents(g) 2.4 1.3 1.9 2.1 2.0 1.9
CIPD(h) n.a. 1.2 2.0 1.9 1.6 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD),
Incomes Data Services, KPMG/REC/Markit, the Labour Research Department, ONS, XpertHR and
Bank calculations.
(a) Figures for 2016 Q1 are data for the three months to February.
(b) Whole-economy total pay excluding bonuses and arrears of pay.
(c) Percentage points. The bonus contribution does not always equal the difference between total AWE growth
and AWE regular pay growth due to rounding.
(d) Average over the past twelve months, based on monthly data.
(e) Measures of expected wages for the year ahead. Produced by weighting together balances for
manufacturing, distributive trades, business/consumer/professional services and financial services using
employee job shares.
(f) Produced by weighting together survey indices for the pay of permanent and temporary placements using
employee job shares; quarterly averages. A reading above 50.0 indicates growth on the previous month
and those below 50.0 indicate a decrease. The greater the divergence from 50.0, the greater the rate of
change signalled by the index.
(g) End-quarter observation for manufacturing and services weighted together using employee job shares. The
scores refer to companies' labour costs over the past three months compared with the same period a year
earlier. Scores of -5 to 5 represent rapidly falling and rapidly rising respectively, with zero representing no
change.
(h) Pay increase intentions excluding bonuses over the coming year. Data only available since 2012.
24 Inflation Report May 2016
Table 4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements
Developments anticipated in February Developments since February
Household energy prices Broadly as expected
• Domestic gas prices to fall by 5% over
the spring.
• Domestic electricity prices to remain
unchanged.
• Domestic gas price cuts of 5% have been
announced.
• Domestic electricity prices have been flat.
Import prices Broadly as expected
• Non-fuel import prices to rise by 1½%
in the four quarters to 2016 Q3.
• Non-fuel import prices expected to have
risen by 2% in the four quarters to
2016 Q1.
Unit labour costs Broadly as expected
• Four-quarter growth in whole-economy
unit labour costs to pick up to 2¼% by
2016 Q3.
• Whole-economy unit labour costs
expected to have grown by 0.7% in the
four quarters to Q1, but growth projected
to recover to 2½% by Q3.
Inflation expectations Broadly as expected
• Indicators of inflation expectations
continue to be broadly consistent with
the 2% target.
• Most measures of inflation expectations
have been broadly flat so far this year.
On balance, measures judged to be
broadly consistent with the 2% target.
CPI inflation rose to 0.5% in March, although it probably fell back to 0.3% in April. The low rate of
inflation mainly reflects the effects of past falls in energy and food prices, but it also reflects the
effects of the past appreciation of sterling on other imported goods and services prices, and
subdued domestic cost growth. Inflation is projected to rise gently over the summer months as the
effects of those external factors continue to fade, with the recent pickup in oil prices supporting
that rise. Further ahead, domestic cost pressures are expected to pick up gradually. Inflation
expectations are judged to remain broadly consistent with the MPC’s 2% target.
4.1 CPI inflation
CPI inflation was 0.5% in March, compared to 0.2% in
December (Chart 4.1), and was 0.1 percentage points higher
than projected at the time of the February Report. That slight
upside news was more than accounted for by a pickup in the
contribution of airfares, which boosted services inflation
(Chart 4.2). This appears to have been partly related to the
timing of the Easter holidays, and so probably unwound in
April.
Excluding the effect of airfares, CPI inflation in March was
0.1 percentage points lower than expected three months ago.
That mainly reflected weaker-than-anticipated inflation in
food and other goods prices. Partly offsetting this, the recent
rise in oil prices meant that the contribution of fuel prices to
inflation in March was less negative than projected three
months ago (Section 4.2).
As inflation remains more than 1 percentage point away from
the MPC’s 2% target, the Governor has written a sixth
consecutive open letter to the Chancellor as required by the
MPC’s remit.(1) As explained in that letter, the vast majority of
the current weakness in inflation relative to the target is
accounted for by past falls in energy and food prices
(Chart 4.2). As the effects of the past falls in petrol and food
prices drop out of the annual rate, inflation should pick up
further. Falls in wholesale gas prices over the past two years
are likely, however, to continue to be passed through to lower
retail gas prices over the next year and a half (Section 4.2).
As set out in the letter, core inflation — which excludes energy
and food prices — and within that services inflation, has also
remained slightly subdued (Chart 4.3). An important driver of
4 Costs and prices
1
0
1
2
3
4
Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July Jan. July
Percentage change in prices on a year earlier
2013 14
Projection
15 16
CPI
–
+
Chart 4.1 CPI inflation rose to 0.5% in March
CPI inflation and Bank staff’s near-term projection(a)
(a) The green diamonds show Bank staff’s central projection for CPI inflation in January,
February and March 2016 at the time of the February Inflation Report. The blue diamonds
show the current staff projection for April, May and June 2016. The bands on each side of
the diamonds show the root mean squared error of the projections for CPI inflation one, two
and three months ahead made since 2004.
(1) The letter can be found at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/cpiletter120516.pdf.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 25
that weakness is likely to have been muted growth in domestic
costs, particularly labour costs (Section 4.3). Lower prices for
imported goods and services resulting from the past
appreciation of sterling and subdued world export price
inflation (Section 4.2) will have also weighed on core inflation.
CPI inflation probably fell back to 0.3% in April (Chart 4.1), as
the contribution of airfares unwound. Inflation is projected to
then increase steadily over the following months, reaching
0.9% in September, as the past falls in energy and food prices
drop out of the annual comparison (Chart 4.2). That
near-term path is slightly higher than projected at the time of
the February Report: the pass-through from higher oil prices
to petrol prices is projected to more than offset the effects of
the downside news in food and other goods prices.
Further ahead, the outlook for CPI inflation will depend on the
speed at which the drag from imported cost pressures
continues to diminish (Section 4.2), and on the strengthening
of unit labour cost growth, as well as on companies’ pricing
decisions and inflation expectations (Section 4.3). In addition,
the effects of the soft drinks industry levy announced by the
Government in the March Budget is projected to boost CPI
inflation by around 0.1 percentage points for a year from
2018 Q2.
4.2 Imported cost pressures
CPI inflation is sensitive to global pricing pressures. Over the
past year, falls in global energy prices, in particular, have
pulled down inflation in household energy and fuel prices
(Chart 4.2). Lower energy prices will also have had indirect
effects on inflation through their impact on the costs of
producing other goods and services. Inflation has also been
affected by developments in global export prices and the
sterling exchange rate.
Food and energy prices
Agricultural commodity prices have risen by around 5% in
US dollar terms (Section 1), and by a similar amount in sterling
terms, since the February Report. Based on these prices and
reports from the Bank’s Agents of continued intense
competition among food retailers, CPI domestic food prices
are projected to change little in the coming months. So, as
the past falls in food prices continue to drop out of the annual
comparison, the negative contribution of food to CPI inflation
is projected to diminish (Chart 4.2). But food prices have
been persistently weaker than expected over the past six
months, and there is uncertainty around this projection.
Since the February Report, spot oil prices have risen by US$15
per barrel to US$44 per barrel (Section 1). In sterling terms,
spot oil prices — although still lower than a year ago — have
risen by 50% over the past three months (Chart 4.4). That
2
0
2
4
6
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Other goods(b) (35%)
Energy (7%)
Food and non-alcoholic
 beverages (10%)
Services (48%) CPI inflation
 (per cent)
Percentage points
Projection(c)
–
+
Chart 4.2 The drag on inflation from food and energy
prices should continue to fade
Contributions to CPI inflation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg, Department of Energy and Climate Change, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Contributions to annual CPI inflation. Figures in parentheses are weights in the CPI basket in
2016, and may not sum to 100 due to rounding.
(b) Calculated as the difference between CPI inflation and the other contributions identified in
the chart.
(c) Bank staff projection. Electricity, gas and other fuels prices projections include the estimated
effects of announcements by three major utilities companies of, on average, a 5% reduction
in gas prices from April 2016, as well as an assumption that utilities companies reduce gas
prices by just over 10% in Autumn 2016. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department of
Energy and Climate Change petrol price data for April 2016 and are then based on the
May 2016 sterling oil futures curve shown in Chart 4.4.
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1997 99 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Range of core CPI measures(a)
CPI
_
+
Chart 4.3 Core inflation measures remain relatively
subdued
CPI inflation and measures of core CPI inflation
(a) Swathe includes measures of core CPI, all adjusted by Bank staff for changes in the rate of
VAT, although there is uncertainty around the precise impact of those changes. It includes
measures of CPI excluding: food and energy; food, non-alcoholic beverages and energy;
food, alcohol, energy and tobacco; food, alcohol, energy, tobacco and education; food,
non-alcoholic beverages, alcohol, energy and tobacco; food, non-alcoholic beverages,
alcohol, energy, tobacco and education. It also includes the weighted median inflation rate
of the 85 CPI sub-components and a measure where component weights in CPI are
multiplied by the inverse of the past volatility of that component.
26 Inflation Report May 2016
has begun to feed through to higher petrol prices. Oil futures
prices — on which the MPC’s projections are conditioned —
are also higher than at the time of the February Report, but are
now less upward sloping, such that the futures price in two
years’ time is only around 10% higher in sterling terms than
three months ago. Overall, petrol prices are projected to pull
down CPI inflation for the remainder of this year by slightly
less than anticipated three months ago.
Wholesale gas spot prices have fallen broadly in line with the
futures curve at the time of the February Report, on which the
MPC’s forecasts were conditioned (Chart 4.4). Futures prices
have been broadly stable, and remain 40% lower than in
mid-2014. Broadly as assumed in February, so far this year all
the major household gas suppliers have announced cuts to
their retail gas prices of around 5% (Table 4.A). The size of
further retail gas price cuts over the MPC’s forecast period is
assumed to be similar to three months ago: just over 10% in
Autumn 2016 and a further small cut in Autumn 2017.
The speed at which the past falls in wholesale gas prices are
passed through to domestic gas bills is, however, uncertain
and will depend on a range of factors. For instance, energy
suppliers agree contracts for future wholesale gas supplies
some time in advance. That means that pass-through occurs
with a lag and the exact timing will depend on the structure of
those contracts, which may vary between suppliers and over
time.
There is also considerable uncertainty around the size of the
eventual fall in domestic gas prices and the extent to which it
will be reflected in CPI inflation. On the one hand, price
reductions in the domestic gas market so far appear to have
been particularly concentrated in fixed-price tariffs, rather
than variable-price tariffs. The CPI basket captures only
variable-price tariffs, so if variable-price tariffs continue to fall
by less than fixed-price tariffs, measured CPI inflation may not
reflect the overall fall in retail gas prices. On the other hand,
the impact of gas price cuts on CPI inflation could be larger
than assumed if competitive pressures mean that retail prices
fall by more, or if more of the fall in gas prices is ultimately
reflected in variable-price tariffs.
Non-energy import prices
Non-energy import prices fell by more than 2% in the four
quarters to 2015 Q4 (Chart 4.5), reflecting the past
appreciation of sterling and subdued world export price
inflation (Section 1). As explained in the box on
pages 28–29 of the November 2015 Report, the subsequent
pass-through of changes in import prices to consumer prices
tends to be full but gradual, with most of the pass-through
occurring over a three-year period. Bank staff judge that the
drag on CPI inflation from the past fall in import prices is
currently easing and is likely to continue to fade over the next
year or so. But the precise speed and extent of pass-through
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Foreign export prices
in sterling terms(b)
UK import price deflator(c)
Foreign export prices in foreign currency(d)
–
+
Chart 4.5 UK import prices probably rose in 2016 Q1
UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel(a)
Sources: Bank of England, CEIC, Eurostat, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream and
Bank calculations.
(a) The diamonds show Bank staff’s projections for 2016 Q1.
(b) Domestic currency non-oil export prices of goods and services of 51 countries weighted
according to their share in UK imports, divided by the sterling effective exchange rate. The
sample does not include any major oil exporters.
(c) UK goods and services import deflator excluding fuels and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(d) Domestic currency non-oil export prices as defined in footnote (b).
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2007 09 11 13 15 17
May 2016 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
February 2016 Inflation Report futures curve(c)
Pence per therm £ per barrel
Oil(a) (right-hand scale)
Gas(b)
 (left-hand scale)
Chart 4.4 Sterling oil prices have risen, while wholesale
gas prices have been broadly stable
Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations.
(a) US dollar Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time converted into sterling.
(b) One-day forward price of UK natural gas.
(c) Averages during the fifteen working days to 4 May 2016 and 27 January 2016 respectively.
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage change on a year earlier
Range of unit labour cost measures
–
+
Chart 4.6 Measures of unit labour cost growth eased
slightly in 2015 Q4
Measures of unit labour costs(a)
(a) Includes: whole-economy unit labour costs; whole-economy unit wage costs;
whole-economy AWE total pay divided by productivity; whole-economy AWE regular pay
divided by productivity; private sector AWE total pay divided by productivity; private sector
AWE regular pay divided by productivity, all as defined in Table 4.B of the February Report.
Also includes private sector unit labour costs, which is based on the same definition of
whole-economy unit labour costs, except that it excludes the public sector.
 Section 4 Costs and prices 27
of changes in import prices to consumer prices can vary over
time and will depend on the factors driving the change and
economic conditions at the time.
Sterling has depreciated by 9% since its peak in November
2015 (Section 1) and, as a result, import prices probably rose in
Q1 (Chart 4.5). Although estimates are highly uncertain, the
evidence in the box on page 5 suggests that roughly half of
that depreciation in sterling might be accounted for by risks
associated with a vote to leave in the forthcoming referendum
on UK membership of the European Union. Following the
outcome, it is likely that the exchange rate will adjust again,
consistent with market participants’ view of the outlook at
that time. Import prices and CPI inflation will remain sensitive
to developments in the exchange rate.
4.3 Domestic cost pressures
In addition to imported cost pressures, the outlook for
inflation will depend on the pace at which domestic cost
growth — in particular, labour cost growth — picks up from its
currently subdued rates. It will also depend on the extent to
which firms pass through changes in costs to consumer prices,
and it will be influenced by inflation expectations.
Labour costs and domestically generated inflation
Labour costs form a major part of the domestic cost of
producing output. As discussed in the February Report, there
are several ways of measuring the average cost of labour per
unit of output. Four-quarter growth in all of these measures
fell back slightly in 2015 Q4, and sit within a relatively narrow
range of 1%–2% (Chart 4.6). Growth in the broadest
measure, whole-economy unit labour costs — based on
National Accounts compensation data and the MPC’s backcast
for GDP growth — fell to 1.1% in Q4 (Chart 4.7). That was
slightly weaker than expected at the time of the
February Report, due to both weaker growth in wages and
salaries than projected and small upward revisions to the
backcast for GDP growth over the recent past. Unit labour
cost growth is expected to have edged down further to 0.7%
in 2016 Q1, reflecting a pickup in productivity growth
(Section 3).
Some other indicators of domestically generated inflation
(DGI) are even more subdued than growth in unit labour costs
(Chart 4.8). Overall, however, the average of a range of DGI
measures was broadly stable, albeit subdued, at close to 1% in
2015 Q4.
Beyond the near term, as nominal wage growth recovers
(Section 3), the MPC’s central expectation is for growth in
overall labour costs to pick up somewhat more rapidly than
productivity growth, reducing the extent to which domestic
cost growth pulls down inflation (Section 5).
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2005 07 09 11 13 15
Productivity
Non-wage labour costs per head
Wages, salaries and self-employment
income per head(b)
Unit labour costs (per cent)
Percentage points
–
+
Chart 4.7 Unit labour cost growth is expected to have
slowed further in Q1
Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy unit labour cost
growth(a)
(a) Whole-economy labour costs divided by GDP, based on the backcast of the final estimate of
 GDP. The diamond shows Bank staff’s projection for 2016 Q1. Employment data have been
 adjusted for expected revisions to the Labour Force Survey to incorporate the latest ONS
 population estimates and projections.
(b) Self-employment income is calculated from mixed income, assuming that the share of
 employment income in that is the same as the share of employee compensation in nominal
 GDP less mixed income.
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15
Percentage changes on a year earlier
Average of DGI measures
Range of DGI measures(a)
–
+
Chart 4.8 Domestically generated inflation remained
broadly flat in 2015 Q4
Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI)
(a) Includes: whole-economy unit labour costs (as defined in footnote (a) of Chart 4.7); private
sector AWE total pay divided by private sector productivity; the GDP deflator; the GDP
deflator excluding government; and the services producer prices index.
28 Inflation Report May 2016
Firms’ pricing decisions and margins
Developments in prices near the start of the supply chain can
provide an early indication of changes in consumer goods and
services prices. Official data show that input prices have
started to rise, and some business survey indicators of input
prices — such as the CIPS services and manufacturing sector
indices — have also risen, reflecting higher commodity and
labour costs and the recent depreciation of sterling. There are
also signs that output prices early in the supply chain are
rising.
More generally, the outlook for output prices, including
consumer prices, depends on the extent to which higher costs
are passed through or absorbed in margins. The profit share,
an indicator of aggregate margins, appears to have risen
following its sharp fall during the crisis (Chart 4.9). But
margins will vary across firms and sectors, with contacts of the
Bank’s Agents reporting that margins remain squeezed in
some sectors such as retail and manufacturing, due to
competitive pressures and the slowing in global demand
(Section 2).
Inflation expectations
Inflation expectations are an important determinant of the
outlook for inflation. Together with actual inflation, they can
influence both wage and price-setting behaviour. The MPC
monitors a range of indicators to assess whether inflation
expectations are well anchored.
Movements in measures of households’ inflation expectations
have been mixed in recent months but, on average, measures
have risen slightly (Table 4.B). Overall, households’
short-term inflation expectations remain some way below
their historical averages. Households’ longer-term
expectations — which may be more informative when
considering whether expectations are well anchored — are
much closer to their past averages.
In contrast, companies’ short-term inflation expectations have
fallen slightly since the February Report (Table 4.B). In
addition, according to the Deloitte CFO Survey, the proportion
of respondents that expected inflation to be below 1.5% in
two years’ time rose further in Q1 to 60%. Measures of
inflation expectations of professional forecasters and those
derived from financial market prices have, however, been
broadly stable and remain close to their past averages
(Table 4.B).
Overall, most measures of inflation expectations have been
broadly unchanged so far in 2016. The MPC judges that
inflation expectations remain well anchored, and it will
continue to monitor developments in inflation expectations
carefully.
10
15
20
25
1998 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14
Per cent
0
Chart 4.9 Companies’ margins appear to have recovered
in recent years
Private non-financial corporate profit share (excluding the
oil sector)(a)
(a) Gross trading profits of PNFCs (excluding continental shelf companies) less the alignment
adjustment divided by nominal gross value added at factor cost.
Table 4.B Indicators of inflation expectations(a)
Per cent 2000 (or start
of series) Averages 2013 2014 2015 2016
to 2007 since
averages(b) 2008 H1 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2(c)
One year ahead inflation expectations
Households(d)
Bank(e) 2.4 3.1 3.5 2.7 2.1 2.0 2.0 1.8 n.a.
Barclays Basix(f) 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.3 1.5 1.6 1.3 n.a. 1.7
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 2.5 2.4 2.7 2.0 1.2 1.5 1.3 1.4 1.6
Companies (2008 Q2)(g) n.a. 0.5 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.3 n.a.
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(h) 2.6 2.7 3.0 2.8 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.5
Two to three year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank (2009 Q1)(e) n.a. 2.8 3.3 2.7 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.1 n.a.
Barclays Basix(f) 3.2 3.1 3.2 2.6 2.0 2.0 1.7 n.a. 2.3
Professional forecasters
(2006 Q2)(i) 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.1
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(j) 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.8 2.9
Five to ten year ahead expectations
Households(d)
Bank (2009 Q1)(e) n.a. 3.2 3.6 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.9 2.9 n.a.
Barclays Basix (2008 Q3)(f) n.a. 3.7 3.8 3.6 3.1 3.0 3.0 n.a. 3.7
YouGov/Citigroup (Nov. 2005) 3.5 3.2 3.5 3.0 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.8 2.8
Financial markets (Oct. 2004)(k) 3.0 3.4 3.5 3.4 3.2 3.4 3.3 3.2 3.1
Memo: CPI inflation 1.6 2.5 2.6 1.5 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.4 n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Bloomberg, CBI (all rights reserved), Citigroup, GfK, ONS, TNS,
YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are non seasonally adjusted.
(b) Dates in parentheses indicate start dates of the data series.
(c) Financial markets data are averages from 1 April to 4 May 2016. YouGov/Citigroup data are for April.
Barclays Basix data are for the survey conducted in April.
(d) The household surveys ask about expected changes in prices but do not reference a specific price index, and
the measures are based on the median estimated price change.
(e) In 2016 Q1, the survey provider changed from GfK to TNS.
(f) No data available for 2016 Q1.
(g) CBI data for the manufacturing, business/consumer services and distribution sectors, weighted together
using nominal shares in value added. Companies are asked about the expected percentage price change
over the coming twelve months in the markets in which they compete.
(h) Instantaneous RPI inflation one year ahead implied from swaps.
(i) Bank’s survey of external forecasters, inflation rate three years ahead.
(j) Instantaneous RPI inflation three years ahead implied from swaps.
(k) Five-year, five-year forward RPI inflation implied from swaps.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 29
5 Prospects for inflation
CPI inflation has risen a little further, to 0.5%, but remains well below the 2% target. That shortfall
primarily reflects a continuing, albeit temporary, effect from past falls in energy prices, along with a
drag from the prices of food and other imported goods and services; domestic cost pressures also
remain subdued. Four-quarter GDP growth has slowed from above-average rates in 2014, and is
likely to have fallen back further in 2016 Q2 as uncertainty around the forthcoming referendum on
UK membership of the European Union weighs on companies’ and households’ spending.
Consistent with the MPC’s usual convention that government policy is followed, the projections in
this Report are conditioned on an assumed continuation of EU membership, so that weakness in
activity starts to unwind in the second half of the year. The MPC’s best collective judgement,
conditioned on the path for Bank Rate currently implied by market interest rates, is that growth is
likely to recover next year, such that spare capacity is eroded and, as the drag from external factors
fades, rising domestic cost growth returns inflation to the 2% target by the middle of 2018.
Over the past few months some asset prices and indicators of
uncertainty and activity appear to have been affected by the
forthcoming referendum on UK membership of the
European Union. Following its usual convention, which is to
assume government policy is followed, the MPC’s projections
in this Report are conditioned on a continuation of EU
membership. That has implications for the treatment of the
exchange rate, as risks associated with a possible vote to leave
have probably been an important contributor to the 9% fall in
the sterling ERI from its November 2015 peak.
As set out in more detail in the box on page 40, in order to
maintain consistency between its conditioning paths and its
convention that government policy is followed, the MPC has
taken a judgement not to let that part of the fall in the
exchange rate that appears to have been associated with the
referendum affect its growth or inflation projections. Evidence
set out in the box on page 5 suggests that roughly half of the
decline in the sterling effective exchange rate since
November 2015 might reflect such effects. In other words,
the forecast is conditioned on a path for the exchange rate
that is around half way between its November 2015 peak and
its value in the fifteen days to 4 May. That path is a little
higher than the one underlying the February Report.
No such adjustments have been made to the conditioning
paths for other asset prices, where the evidence for
referendum effects is less clear. The MPC’s projections are
therefore conditioned on the path for Bank Rate implied by
market yields in the fifteen days to 4 May. This path rises to
only 0.8% by 2019 Q2. That is around 20 basis points lower
30 Inflation Report May 2016
on average than the path underlying the February projections
(Table 5.A) although, acting against that, credit spreads are
projected to be a little higher (Table 5.C).(1)
Despite the convention that government policy is followed,
there are some effects from the referendum in the MPC’s
projections. As described in Key Judgement 2, it is likely that a
period of uncertainty ahead of the referendum will be
associated with a period of weaker growth — already apparent
in some indicators — this year. Given the conditioning
assumption that the United Kingdom remains in the
European Union, this weakness is projected to unwind over
subsequent quarters. There are risks around this path: if
uncertainty effects are weighing more on the data than
assumed then underlying momentum may be greater;
conversely if uncertainty effects are weighing less then
underlying momentum may have slowed more than assumed.
In the central projection conditioned on market rates,
four-quarter GDP growth, which has fallen below 2½% over
the past year, dips further in the near term. Thereafter growth
picks up, as the drag from uncertainty unwinds, and settles at
around 2¼%, moderately below average rates (Chart 5.1). As
in February, risks to that profile are judged to be skewed to the
downside, stemming in particular from the global outlook
(Key Judgement 1). That UK growth outlook is a little lower
than projected three months ago, reflecting Committee
judgements on saving rates (Key Judgement 2) and on the
outlook for productivity growth (Key Judgement 3). Weak
activity growth in Q2 is associated with a slight widening in
the margin of spare capacity, which is subsequently eroded
over the next year or so. With productivity, and hence
potential supply, growth a little weaker than in February,
output rises a little above potential over the second half of the
forecast period despite the slightly lower profile for demand.
That is associated with a pickup in domestic cost growth that
returns inflation to the 2% target, as the drag from external
factors fades (Key Judgement 4), and then pushes it slightly
above the target in the medium term (Chart 5.2). The profile
also now reflects the soft drinks industry levy, announced in
Budget 2016, that is due to come into effect in 2018: that
raises annual inflation by 0.1 percentage points between
2018 Q2 and 2019 Q1.
These central projections are summarised in Table 5.B and are
explained further in Section 5.1, which sets out the four key
judgements that underlie them and the uncertainties around
those.
Table 5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates(a)
Per cent
 2016 2017 2018 2019
 Q2(b) Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
May 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8
February 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1
(a) The data are fifteen working day averages of one-day forward rates to 4 May 2016 and 27 January 2016
respectively. The curve is based on overnight index swap rates.
(b) May figure for 2016 Q2 is an average of realised overnight rates to 4 May 2016, and forward rates thereafter.
(1) Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on:
Bank Rate following a path implied by market yields; a constant stock of asset
purchases; the Recommendations of the Financial Policy Committee and the current
regulatory plans of the Prudential Regulation Authority; the Government’s tax and
spending plans as set out in the March 2016 Budget; commodity prices following
market paths; and a path for the sterling effective exchange rate at around 89.
The main assumptions are set out in a table at www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/mayca.pdf.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
ONS data
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
+
–
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. To the left of the
vertical dashed line, the distribution reflects the likelihood of revisions to the data over the past;
to the right, it reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If economic
circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective
judgement is that the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within the darkest central band
on only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to
lie within each pair of the lighter green areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the
forecast period, GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of
100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP growth can fall anywhere
outside the green area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the
light grey background. See the box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a
fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
Chart 5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
Table 5.B Forecast summary(a)
Projections
 2016 2017 2018
GDP(b) 2.0 (2.2) 2.3 (2.4) 2.3 (2.5)
Excluding backcast 1.9 (2.2) 2.3 (2.4) 2.3 (2.5)
 2016 Q2 2017 Q2 2018 Q2 2019 Q2
CPI inflation(c) 0.4 (0.4) 1.5 (1.6) 2.1 (2.1) 2.2
LFS unemployment rate 5.1 (4.8) 5.0 (4.8) 4.9 (4.7) 4.8
Bank Rate(d) 0.5 (0.5) 0.5 (0.6) 0.6 (0.9) 0.8
(a) Modal projections for GDP, CPI inflation and LFS unemployment. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the February 2016 Inflation Report. Projections were only available to 2019 Q1
in February.
(b) Calendar-year growth in real GDP consistent with the modal projection for four-quarter growth in real GDP.
The MPC’s projections are based on its backcast for GDP.
(c) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(d) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on
overnight index swap rates.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 31
In light of the economic outlook, at its meeting ending on
11 May the MPC voted to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5% and the
stock of purchased assets at £375 billion. The factors behind
that decision are set out in the Monetary Policy Summary on
pages i–ii of this Report, and in more detail in the Minutes of
the meeting.(1)
5.1 Key judgements and risks
The Committee’s four key judgements are described in more
detail below. Table 5.C provides projections for variables that
illustrate those judgements; Table 5.D provides a range of
indicators to monitor them; and Table 5.E shows indicative
projections for a range of other variables.
Key Judgement 1: global growth picks up a little but
remains below past average rates
In PPP-weighted terms, global growth has slowed in recent
years, and in 2015 Q4 reached its lowest four-quarter rate
since the crisis. That weakness largely reflected developments
in emerging market economies, where growth has slowed
across a range of countries, with Brazil and Russia experiencing
particularly sharp downturns. Growth in advanced economies,
which comprise the largest share of UK export markets, has
been more stable, such that the dip in UK-weighted world
growth has been smaller. Over recent months, there has been
mixed news across different economies but, taking these
together, the global outlook has changed little.
At the beginning of 2016, prices of risky assets fell sharply as
market participants became more concerned about the
outlook for the global economy. Since then, the European
Central Bank (ECB) and Bank of Japan have announced further
(1) The Minutes are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/
Documents/mpc/pdf/2016/may.pdf.
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
+
–
Chart 5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest
rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
+
–
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Chart 5.3 CPI inflation projection in February based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 depict the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. They have been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves
remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie
within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan charts are constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter red areas on 30 occasions. In any particular
quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall anywhere outside the red area of the
fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the light grey background. See the box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
32 Inflation Report May 2016
easing measures, the Chinese authorities have announced a
growth target for 2016 that was higher than expected and the
Federal Open Market Committee has revised down its
projections for the path of monetary policy, suggesting fewer
rate rises over 2016. Perhaps associated with these policy
moves, there have been declines in interest rate expectations in
a range of other countries, including the United Kingdom, and a
recovery in the prices of risky assets. Reflecting similar factors,
along with declining growth in oil supply, oil prices have risen by
US$15 since the February Report to around US$44 a barrel. The
additional policy stimulus is assumed to support the outlook for
activity, as do the rises in prices of risky assets. Higher prices for
oil and other commodities offset that to some degree overall,
although they also reduce downside risks to growth in
commodity-exporting countries.
In the euro area, growth picked up in 2016 Q1 but, even after
accounting for the drag from lower energy prices, inflation has
remained low, as have inflation expectations. The stimulus
package announced by the ECB (Section 1) is projected to
support growth and inflation over the forecast period. Overall,
the projection for euro-area activity is a little stronger than
three months ago (Table 5.C), as the stimulus package is partly
offset by the effects of higher oil prices.
In the United States, GDP growth disappointed in the first
quarter, at only 0.1%. The labour market has remained strong,
however, with employment growth continuing at a steady pace,
such that productivity has fallen over recent quarters. There are
also signs of a strengthening in unit labour costs and core
inflation. Relative to three months ago, and despite a projected
bounceback in Q2, growth in 2016 is lower than previously
projected; thereafter, support from the lower path for the yield
curve broadly offsets news in the data and the projection
remains one where productivity and hence output growth pick
up (Table 5.D). Risks to the US outlook stem particularly from
the assumed path for productivity growth, which could be lower
if recent trends reflect a more persistent slowing, or higher if
some of the recent weakness in the level is unwound.
The projection for Chinese activity growth has been revised up
since the February Report, reflecting announcements by the
authorities, consistent with their emphasis on doubling GDP,
relative to 2010, by 2020. Those announcements, however,
reduce the emphasis on rebalancing the economy away from
investment and towards domestic consumption and are also
likely to be associated with an expansion in domestic credit that
would be more rapid than previously projected; total social
financing increased markedly in Q1. Given that, the downside
risks to the outlook in China have increased in the medium
term.
A number of developments should support activity in other
emerging market economies including the stabilisation in
commodity prices, expected stronger demand from China in the
Table 5.C MPC key judgements(a)(b)
Key Judgement 1: global growth picks up a little but remains below past average
rates
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
World GDP (UK-weighted)(c) 3 2¼ (2¼) 2½ (2½) 2½ (2¼)
World GDP (PPP-weighted)(d) 4 3 (3) 3½ (3¼) 3½ (3¼)
Euro-area GDP(e) 2¼ 1¾ (1½) 1¾ (1¾) 1¾ (1½)
US GDP(f) 3 1¾ (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2 (2)
Dollar oil prices(g) 39 46 (37) 49 (42) 51 (46)
Key Judgement 2: UK private domestic demand grows at a solid pace following a
period of uncertainty-related weakness
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
Credit spreads(h) ¾(i) 2¼ (2¼) 2¼ (2) 2 (2)
Household saving ratio(j) 8¾ 3½ (3) 2¾ (2¾) 2½ (2¼)
Business investment to GDP ratio(k) 9¾ 9¾ (10¼) 10¼ (10½) 10¾ (11)
Key Judgement 3: annual supply growth picks up a little further
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
Productivity(l) 2¼ 1¼ (1¼) 1¾ (1¾) 1¾ (1¾)
Participation rate(m) 63 63½ (63½) 63½ (63½) 63½ (63¾)
Average hours(n) 32¼ 32 (31¾) 31¾ (31¾) 31¾ (31¾)
Key Judgement 4: a pickup in domestic cost growth returns inflation to the 2% target
as the drag from external factors fades
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
UK import prices(o) ¼ 1 (¾) ¾ (1¼) ¾ (1¼)
Unit labour costs(p) 3 2¾ (2¼) 2¼ (2¼) 2½ (2¾)
Sources: Bank of England, BDRC Continental SME Finance Monitor, Bloomberg, BofA Merrill Lynch Global
Research (used with permission), British Household Panel Survey, Department for Business, Innovation and
Skills, Eurostat, IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank
calculations.
(a) The MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts)
are underpinned by four key judgements. The mapping from the key judgements to individual variables is
not precise, but the profiles in the table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s key
judgements.
(b) Figures show calendar-year growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the February 2016 Inflation Report.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 146 countries weighted according
to their shares in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 147 countries weighted according
to their shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e) Chained-volume measure.
(f) Chained-volume measure.
(g) Average level in Q4. Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices.
(h) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(i) Based on the weighted average of spreads for households and large companies over 2003 and 2004
relative to the level in 2007 Q3. Data used to construct the SME spread are not available for that period.
The period is chosen as broadly representative of one where spreads were neither unusually tight nor
unusually loose.
(j) Calendar-year average. Percentage of total available household resources.
(k) Calendar-year average. Chained-volume business investment as a percentage of GDP.
(l) GDP per hour worked. GDP at market prices is based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Hours worked
have been adjusted for expected revisions to the LFS to incorporate the latest ONS population estimates
and projections.
(m) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population. The participation rate has been adjusted for expected
revisions to the LFS to incorporate the latest ONS population estimate and projections.
(n) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job.
(o) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4.
(p) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at
market prices, based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation
of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income. 
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 33
short term and a slower path for monetary tightening in the
United States. These factors have contributed to the
resumption of net capital inflows to those economies in recent
months, following a year or so of net outflows. That should
help to ease financial conditions and support growth. The
projection for activity in emerging market economies
excluding China is similar to that in the February Report, with
growth gradually recovering, albeit to a rate well below past
averages reflecting long-term demographic and structural
factors (Section 1). The outlook will remain sensitive to
market sentiment towards these economies and to the path of
Chinese demand.
Overall, PPP-weighted world growth is projected to rise a little
faster than expected three months ago (Table 5.C), reflecting
The Committee’s projections are underpinned by four key
judgements. Risks surround all of these, and the MPC will
monitor a broad range of variables to understand the degree
to which the risks are crystallising. The table below shows
Bank staff’s indicative near-term projections that are
consistent with the judgements in the MPC’s central view
evolving as expected.
Table 5.D Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements
Key judgement Likely developments in 2016 Q2 to 2016 Q4 if judgements evolve as expected
1: global growth picks up a
little but remains below past
average rates
• Quarterly euro-area growth to average a little below ½%.
• Annual euro-area HICP inflation to remain close to zero in the coming months and to pick up gradually
in the second half of the year, as past falls in oil prices drop out of the annual calculation.
• Quarterly US GDP growth to average a little above ½%.
• Annual US PCE inflation to fall slightly in coming months, before increasing to around 1½%.
• Indicators of activity consistent with four-quarter PPP-weighted emerging market economy growth of
around 4%; within that, Chinese GDP growth to average around 6¾%.
• Average quarterly growth in UK exports of ½%.
2: UK private domestic
demand grows at a solid pace
following a period of
uncertainty-related weakness
• Quarterly consumption growth of between ½% and ¾%.
• Business investment to fall in Q2, and grow only modestly in Q3, reflecting the impact of
referendum-related uncertainty, before rebounding towards the end of the year.
• Credit spreads to be broadly flat in 2016.
• Mortgage approvals for house purchase to be around 75,000 a month, on average, in 2016 H2,
following a period of volatility in housing transactions around the introduction of a higher rate of
stamp duty on additional properties in April.
• Quarterly housing investment growth to be volatile, reflecting the impact of the additional property
stamp duty change. Quarterly growth to average ¾% over the whole of 2016.
• Rates of increase in the main indices of national house prices to average around ½% per month in
2016 H2.
3: annual supply growth picks
up a little further
• Quarterly hourly productivity to grow at an average pace of around ½%.
• Participation rate to remain stable at around 63½%.
• Average hours to fall by ¾% during 2016 Q2–Q4.
• Unemployment to reach 5% by the end of 2016.
4: a pickup in domestic cost
growth returns inflation to the
2% target as the drag from
external factors fades
• Commodity prices and sterling ERI to evolve in line with the conditioning assumptions set out in
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/mayca.pdf.
• Domestic gas prices to fall by just over 10% in 2016 H2. Domestic electricity prices to remain flat.
• Non-fuel import prices to rise by almost 1% in the year to 2016 Q4.
• Four-quarter AWE growth to pick up to 3% by the end of the year.
• Four-quarter growth in whole-economy unit labour costs to average 2½% in 2016 H2.
• Indicators of inflation expectations to continue to be broadly consistent with the 2% target.
34 Inflation Report May 2016
the upward revisions to the outlook for China. Weighted using
UK export shares, over the three years as a whole, growth is
broadly similar to that in the February projections (Chart 5.4).
On both measures, growth is projected to rise in 2017 but to
settle at a rate somewhat below past averages, with risks to
that outlook remaining to the downside.
The subdued global environment has weighed on both
UK exports and the income that the United Kingdom receives
on foreign investments (Section 2). Reflecting that, the
current account deficit has widened markedly since 2011 and
in 2015 Q4 was its highest on record at 7% of GDP. Some of
the widening is judged to reflect volatility so the current
account deficit is expected to have narrowed in Q1. Over the
forecast period, with only a modest recovery in global growth
projected, net trade and net income flows are not expected to
improve significantly, so the current account deficit averages
around 6% of GDP. There are uncertainties around that path.
In particular, there are reasons to think that the global
recovery, although modest, and an improvement in risk
sentiment, will be associated with some improvement in the
net income received on UK investments overseas. This was, on
average, positive between 2000 and 2012. In that case, the
current account deficit would be narrower and more income
would flow to UK companies and households than assumed in
the central case.
Key Judgement 2: UK private domestic demand
grows at a solid pace following a period of
uncertainty-related weakness
The near-term profile for demand is heavily influenced by the
effects of recent uncertainty. In particular, a range of
indicators suggest that uncertainty has risen, with much of
that likely to reflect referendum-related effects (see the box
on pages 14–15). In line with the MPC’s convention, under the
conditioning assumption that the United Kingdom remains in
the European Union, uncertainty is assumed to recede quickly,
although the effect of the spike in uncertainty on spending is
likely to be somewhat more persistent. Uncertainty is
expected to weigh markedly on demand in Q2. Some
companies are likely to put investment plans on hold:
respondents to the Deloitte CFO Survey reported a sharp
pickup in uncertainty in Q1, with related cuts to investment
plans. Some households may postpone major spending
decisions. These uncertainty-related effects are projected to
continue to weigh on spending somewhat in subsequent
quarters, as it may take time for some investment projects to
be reinstated. Overall, elevated uncertainty is projected to
weigh on the level of output for around a year, reducing
annual growth in 2016, but supporting it in 2017 as those
effects dissipate.
Once the drag from uncertainty has passed, the outlook for
domestic spending depends on two key assumptions: the
outlook for supply (set out in Key Judgement 3) and, on the
Table 5.E Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections(a)
 Average Projections
 1998–
 2007 2016 2017 2018
Household consumption(b) 3¾ 2½ (2¾) 2½ (2½) 2¼ (2¾)
Business investment(c) 2½ 2½ (5½) 7¼ (6) 7¾ (6¼)
Housing investment(d) 3½ 4 (4) 5¼ (5½) 4¾ (5¾)
Exports(e) 4½ 1½ (2¼) 1¼ (1¼) 1¾ (2)
Imports(e) 6 3 (2½) 2¼ (2¼) 2½ (2½)
Real post-tax household income(f) 3 1½ (1) 1¾ (2¼) 2 (2¼)
Employment(g) 1 ¾ (¾) ¾ (¾) ¾ (¾)
Average weekly earnings(h) 4¼ 3 (3) 3¾ (3¾) 4 (4¼)
(a) These projections are produced by Bank staff for the MPC to be consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment. Figures show calendar-year growth rates
unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the February 2016
Inflation Report.
(b) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households.
(c) Chained-volume measure.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending
on services associated with the sale and purchase of property.
(e) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra-community (MTIC)
fraud.
(f) Total available household resources deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator.
(g) Four-quarter growth rate in Q4. Employment has been adjusted for expected revisions to the LFS to
incorporate the latest ONS population estimates and projections.
(h) Four-quarter growth in Q4 in whole-economy total pay.
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Percentage change on previous year
+
–
Projection at the time of the February Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements in May
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth
rates of 146 countries weighted according to their shares in UK exports.
Chart 5.4 World GDP (UK-weighted)(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 35
90
92
94
96
98
100
102
104
106
108
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Index: 1998–2007 average = 100
Projection at the time of the February Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements in May
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year average. Real consumption as a percentage of real labour income, where real
labour income is defined as wages and salaries plus mixed income less taxes plus net
transfers, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Includes non-profit institutions
serving households.
Chart 5.5 Consumption to labour income(a)
demand side, the path of saving. Over the forecast period, the
national saving rate is projected to rise slightly against the
backdrop of a wide current account deficit. The government
deficit falls, as the fiscal consolidation continues, and that is
matched by an increasing private sector financial deficit,
resulting in part from a growing household deficit.
Household consumption growth has risen over recent years to a
rate of around 2¾%, supported both by a falling saving ratio
and, more recently, by a revival in real income growth, in part
reflecting lower prices for energy and other imported items.
Over the forecast period, household income grows more
modestly, reflecting the waning support from lower prices, rates
of productivity growth that remain below past averages
(Key Judgement 3), and the continuing fiscal consolidation.
Recent Inflation Report projections have incorporated a further
marked fall in the saving ratio over the forecast period as
households maintain spending growth even as income growth
slows. A falling saving ratio is consistent with many aspects of
the outlook: the low path for interest rates; credit conditions
remaining supportive; and the past rise in households’ financial
wealth relative to income. Other aspects, however, including
the continuing fiscal consolidation and relatively high debt to
income ratios, would be expected to be associated with upward
pressure on saving. In its May projections, the MPC has taken a
judgement that households may be less willing to reduce saving
rates to support spending growth in coming years than
previously assumed. Relative to three months ago, that
judgement is apparent in a lower ratio of consumption to labour
income, including benefits (Chart 5.5). A weaker path for
non-labour income accruing through pension funds means the
overall household saving ratio projection is only slightly higher in
the medium term (Table 5.C). Over the forecast period,
consumption is projected to grow at below its average rate
(Table 5.E).
Housing market developments can influence households’
consumption and saving decisions, and more directly affect
housing investment. There has been some volatility in housing
transactions in recent months: transactions rose by over 40% in
March ahead of a rise in the stamp duty payable on additional
properties in April 2016. The volume of transactions is likely to
have fallen back in Q2 (Section 2). Referendum-related
uncertainty may also weigh on transactions in Q2. That
volatility is also likely to be seen in housing investment. The
outlook further ahead will depend in part on factors underlying
housing demand and supply including other policies aimed at
the buy-to-let market. In the central projection, housing
transactions rise modestly, and a little more slowly than
assumed three months ago, reflecting a judgement that some of
the factors that have weighed on housing activity in recent years
— including a lack of suitable properties for sale and affordability
constraints — will persist. Housing investment is projected to
grow at a little under 5% a year in the medium term, slightly
36 Inflation Report May 2016
below the profile in the February Report (Table 5.E). Annual
house price inflation is projected to slow to around 6% by
early next year.
Companies have been reducing their financial surpluses in
recent years, and over the forecast period run a small deficit in
aggregate. That is one source of financing for the expansion in
investment, which is also supported by steady growth in
revenues as activity expands. Once the period of
referendum-related weakness has passed, rising capacity
pressures and accommodative credit conditions are assumed
to encourage businesses to expand investment at a fairly rapid
pace, similar to expectations three months ago (Table 5.E). As
well as the effects of referendum-related uncertainty, the
near-term profile for annual growth is also affected by a sharp
fall in extraction sector investment in 2015 Q4: that brings
forward some of the decline in investment built into previous
projections following the marked fall in the oil price. There are
risks on both sides of the outlook for business investment.
Some stem from the commercial property market:
transactions have fallen sharply from their peak a year ago to
levels last seen in 2013 and prices have also declined a little
recently. Referendum-related uncertainty appears to have
exacerbated a slowdown already under way in that market
and, to the extent it persists, could weigh on investment in
new buildings or more broadly reduce investment through
collateral effects. To the upside, the rate of return on
investment remains high and could encourage more
investment than in the central projection.
Key Judgement 3: annual supply growth picks up a
little further
The economy’s supply potential is estimated to have grown at
an annual rate of around 2% over recent years, a little below
average rates. Over the forecast period it is projected to grow
just a little faster, rising to around 2¼%. Within that, labour
supply grows more slowly than in recent years, while
productivity grows more quickly.(1)
Since the February Report, average hours worked have been
stronger than expected. There are reasons to believe that
much of this reflects volatility in the data. In particular,
although average hours actually worked have risen sharply
that was not associated with much change in workers’
reported usual hours — a better indicator of underlying trends
(Section 3). Given that, the level of average hours is assumed
to move back towards the level expected in the February
Report over the next few quarters (Table 5.C).
Productivity fell by more than expected in Q4, in part due to
higher hours worked. In light of that weakness, productivity
growth has been revised down modestly over the forecast
(1) For more details on the labour supply judgements see pages 19–24 of the February
Report; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/
feb.pdf.
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Percentage change on previous year
+
–
Projection at the time of the February Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements in May
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Calendar-year growth rates. GDP per hour worked. GDP is at market prices and projections
are based on the mode of the MPC’s backcast. Hours worked have been adjusted for
expected revisions to the LFS to incorporate the latest ONS population estimates and
projections.
Chart 5.6 Productivity(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 37
period. The MPC continues to judge that productivity will rise
at a faster annual pace over the next three years than over the
past three (Chart 5.6), as resources continue to be reallocated
towards more productive uses. There remain risks around that
judgement on both sides: productivity growth has repeatedly
disappointed over recent years and may continue to do so.
But with the level of productivity remaining lower than in
some other advanced economies and little slack remaining, it
is possible that catch-up over the forecast period could
provide more of a boost to potential supply growth.
Taking these factors together, supply growth picks up a little
over the forecast period, but is on average a little below
demand growth. Spare capacity reduces over the next year or
so and output then rises a little above potential. That is
associated with a gradual fall in the unemployment rate, to
slightly below Bank staff’s estimate of its long-run equilibrium
rate of around 5% (Chart 5.7). There is uncertainty, however,
about where that long-run equilibrium lies and therefore the
extent that the unemployment rate can fall without putting
upward pressure on wage growth and hence inflation. On the
one hand, changes in the benefits system over many years
may have incentivised the unemployed to move into work,
implying a lower sustainable level of unemployment; on the
other hand, the proportion of those unemployed for over
twelve months remains elevated, and it is possible that signals
some degree of mismatch between the unemployed and the
jobs available.
Key Judgement 4: a pickup in domestic cost growth
returns inflation to the 2% target as the drag from
external factors fades
CPI inflation has risen a little further over the past few months
but remains well below the 2% target. That continues mainly
to reflect downward pressure from past falls in energy and
food prices. Despite the rise in oil prices in recent months,
they remain lower than a year ago, and the contribution of
petrol prices to CPI inflation is not expected to turn positive
until the end of the year. Wholesale gas prices have also fallen
over the past year, with the futures curve — a determinant of
the prices set by domestic suppliers — down over 40% since
the summer of 2014. Reflecting that, domestic gas prices have
already been cut by an average of 5% since the autumn of last
year. In the central projection, further cuts of just over 10%
are expected this autumn with further small cuts in
Autumn 2017. Taking domestic energy prices and petrol
together, the contribution of energy prices to CPI inflation
remains negative until late 2018. There are risks around that
path in both directions: wholesale energy prices could move
sharply in either direction and there is additional uncertainty
about the extent and speed of pass-through of lower
wholesale gas prices to domestic bills (Section 4).
Another factor that has been weighing on inflation is the
appreciation of sterling up to November last year. That was
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1998 2001 04 07 10 13 16
Percentage change on a year earlier
Projection at the time of the February Report
Projection consistent with MPC key judgements in May
+
–
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Whole-economy total labour costs divided by GDP at market prices, based on the mode of
the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise compensation of employees and the
labour share multiplied by mixed income. The chart shows data to 2015 Q4 and projections
for four-quarter growth in Q4 thereafter.
Chart 5.8 Unit labour costs(a)
Table 5.F Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths(a)
 Mode Median Mean
2016(b) 2.0 (2.2) 2.0 (2.2) 2.0 (2.2)
2017 2.3 (2.4) 2.2 (2.3) 2.2 (2.3)
2018 2.3 (2.5) 2.2 (2.4) 2.2 (2.4)
(a) The table shows the projections for calendar-year growth of real GDP consistent with the modal, median
and mean projections for four-quarter growth of real GDP implied by the fan chart. Where growth rates
depend in part on the MPC’s backcast, revisions to quarterly growth are assumed to be independent of the
revisions to previous quarters. The figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the
February 2016 Inflation Report. The May and February projections have been conditioned on market interest
rates, and the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank
reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period.
(b) The anticipated revisions to recent estimates of quarterly GDP growth have implications for calendar-year
growth in 2016. Without the anticipated revisions to past GDP growth, the modal path of the Committee’s
May projections would imply calendar-year growth of 1.9% in 2016 rather than 2.0%.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Unemployment rate, per cent
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been
conditioned on the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of
central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands have the same interpretation as in Chart 5.2, and portray 90% of the probability
distribution. The calibration of this fan chart takes account of the likely path dependency of the
economy, where, for example, it is judged that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will
continue to have some effect on unemployment in successive quarters. The fan begins in
2016 Q1, a quarter earlier than the fan for CPI inflation. That is because Q1 is a staff projection
for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for January and February. The unemployment
rate was 5.1% in the three months to February, and is projected to be 5.1% in Q1 as a whole. In
the later part of the forecast period, a significant proportion of this distribution lies below
Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. There is
therefore uncertainty about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Chart 5.7 Unemployment projection based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets
38 Inflation Report May 2016
associated with falling import prices, which are slowly passed
through to lower retail prices. More recently, the exchange
rate has fallen back. As set out in a box on page 40, since a
material proportion of that fall appears to have been
associated with the referendum, and in particular the
possibility of a Leave vote, the MPC has not allowed the full
extent of the recent depreciation to feed through to its
projections for inflation or growth. Nevertheless, import
prices probably rose in Q1, and are projected to rise further
over the forecast period (Table 5.D). The drag from import
prices may have passed its peak already and is projected to
have entirely faded by the second half of 2017. There remains
considerable uncertainty about how quickly a change in
import prices is passed through to CPI inflation, with a risk
that the drag on inflation fades faster than projected.
Although most of the current weakness of inflation is due to
external factors, domestic price pressures have also been
relatively subdued. In particular, unit labour cost growth —
wage growth adjusted for workers’ productivity — remains
below rates consistent with meeting the inflation target
sustainably. Even after accounting for weakness in
productivity, wage growth has not picked up as much as would
have been expected given the tighter labour market implied by
sharp falls in unemployment over recent years and companies’
reports of recruitment difficulties. It is possible that slack is
greater than assumed (Key Judgement 3), suggesting that
unemployment could fall further before upward pressure on
wage growth builds significantly. As discussed in the February
Report, however, the Committee judges that some of the
recent weakness in wage growth is likely to reflect the current
low level of inflation, as reported by contacts of the Bank’s
Agents (Section 3). For example, pressure for higher pay may
have been attenuated by lower energy prices and the
associated boost to real wage growth: real wages have been
growing close to 2% in recent months, broadly in line with
past averages. Over the forecast period, as the factors
weighing on inflation wane, nominal wage growth is projected
to pick up, consistent with the tightness in the labour market
and strengthening productivity growth. Under the path for
Bank Rate implied by market interest rates, labour market
pressures build sufficiently to raise nominal wage growth to
around 4% (Table 5.E). That is associated with a pickup in
unit labour cost growth, albeit a little smaller than that
projected three months ago in the medium term (Chart 5.8),
reflecting slightly less pressure on capacity.
There are risks around the outlook for wages and, hence, unit
labour cost growth in both directions. Wage growth could
pick up more slowly if slack were greater than assumed or if
people take time to revise their wage demands as inflation
rises, although this risk has probably receded a little in recent
months as regular pay has risen broadly in line with prior
expectations. It is also possible, however, that slack is smaller
or that a lack of labour market churn — quit rates remain low
0
1
2
3
4
May
February
1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 +–
Probability density, per cent(b)
Chart 5.10 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in
2017 Q2 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
(a) Chart 5.10 represents the cross-section of the CPI inflation fan chart in 2017 Q2 for the
market interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock
of purchased assets remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands in Chart 5.10 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like the fan
charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey outline
represents the corresponding cross-section of the February 2016 Inflation Report fan chart,
which was conditioned on market interest rates and the same assumption about the stock
of purchased assets.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
inflation being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given inflation rate, specified to one
decimal place.
Table 5.G Q4 CPI inflation
 Mode Median Mean
2016 Q4 0.9 (0.9) 0.9 (0.8) 0.9 (0.8)
2017 Q4 1.8 (1.9) 1.8 (1.9) 1.8 (1.9)
2018 Q4 2.2 (2.2) 2.2 (2.2) 2.2 (2.2)
The table shows projections for Q4 four-quarter CPI inflation. The figures in parentheses show the
corresponding projections in the February 2016 Inflation Report. The May and February projections have been
conditioned on market interest rates, and the assumption that the stock of purchased assets financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period.
0
1
2
3
4
May
February
1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 +–
Probability density, per cent(b)
(a) Chart 5.9 represents the cross-section of the GDP growth fan chart in 2018 Q2 for the
market interest rate projection. It has been conditioned on the assumption that the stock of
purchased assets remains at £375 billion throughout the forecast period. The coloured
bands in Chart 5.9 have a similar interpretation to those on the fan charts. Like the fan
charts, they portray the central 90% of the probability distribution. The grey outline
represents the corresponding cross-section of the February 2016 Inflation Report fan chart,
which was conditioned on market interest rates and the same assumption about the stock of
purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves.
(b) Average probability within each band; the figures on the y-axis indicate the probability of
growth being within ±0.05 percentage points of any given growth rate, specified to
one decimal place.
Chart 5.9 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in
2018 Q2 (central 90% of the distribution)(a)
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 39
— has meant that underlying pay pressures have been slow to
come through. Wage growth could rebound more quickly if
churn increases.
5.2 The projections for demand,
unemployment and inflation
Based on these judgements and the risks around them, and
under the conditioning path for Bank Rate based on market
yields, which reaches 0.8% by 2019 Q2, four-quarter GDP
growth dips further in the near term, reflecting the period of
uncertainty surrounding the referendum. Thereafter it picks up
as that drag unwinds, before settling at 2¼% (Chart 5.1). That
growth is driven by private domestic demand, in the face of
subdued global activity and a continuing fiscal consolidation at
home. Growth is slightly weaker than projected three months
ago, due to Committee judgements on saving rates and
productivity growth (Table 5.F). The risks to the outlook remain
weighted to the downside (Chart 5.9), reflecting the possibility
that global activity and, in particular, growth in emerging market
economies will disappoint.
Unemployment has remained at 5.1% in recent months, close to
its estimated long-run equilibrium rate: overall, although the
precise extent of slack remains uncertain, it appears that only a
little remains. Over the forecast period, unemployment falls
slightly below 5% (Chart 5.7) and capacity pressures build a
little. There remains considerable uncertainty about the current
supply capacity of the economy and its future growth rate, with
risks on both sides of the central projection.
CPI inflation is projected to pick up over the next year or so as
the drags from energy and other imported goods and services
prices unwind. In the central projection, under the path implied
by market interest rates, domestic cost pressures are projected
to return inflation to the 2% target by mid-2018 and to take it
slightly above the target thereafter. The central projection for
CPI inflation is broadly similar to that three months ago in the
medium term. The risks to the central projection are judged to
be balanced (Chart 5.10): with no further downside news in
wages or prices, the MPC judges that the chance of inflation
remaining persistently weak in the near term has lessened
somewhat since February (Table 5.G). Taking the central path
and the risks together, inflation is judged as likely to be above as
below the 2% target in two years’ time, but a little more likely to
be above it at the three-year horizon (Chart 5.11).
Charts 5.12 and 5.13 show the MPC’s projections under the
alternative constant rate assumption. That assumption is that
Bank Rate remains at 0.5% throughout the three years of the
forecast period, before rising towards the market path over the
subsequent three years. Given the flatness of the curve
underlying the market rate projection, the profiles for GDP
growth and inflation are only slightly higher than the market
rate projections.

May
February
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Probability of inflation at or below
the target, inverted (per cent)
Probability of inflation
above the target (per cent)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2016 17 18 19
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Chart 5.11 Inflation probabilities relative to the target
The May and February swathes in this chart are derived from the same distributions as
Charts 5.2 and 5.3 respectively. They indicate the assessed probability of inflation relative to
the target in each quarter of the forecast period. The 5 percentage points width of the swathes
reflects the fact that there is uncertainty about the precise probability in any given quarter, but
they should not be interpreted as confidence intervals.
Percentage increases in output on a year earlier
ONS data
Bank estimates of past growth Projection
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
+
–
See footnote to Chart 5.1.
Chart 5.12 GDP projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased assets
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
+
–
Chart 5.13 CPI inflation projection based on constant
nominal interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased
assets
See footnote to Chart 5.2.
40 Inflation Report May 2016
The treatment of asset prices in the
May Inflation Report projections
The MPC’s projections are conditioned on asset prices
prevailing in the run-up to each Report. That means that large
movements in asset prices can have significant effects on the
projections, although those movements often reflect news
about the outlook that has an offsetting effect. For example,
if interest rate expectations fall because there has been a
deterioration in global growth prospects, that weakening
would tend to offset any boost to activity and inflation from
the lower interest rate path. As this box sets out, however,
allowing movements in asset prices that are believed to be
associated with the forthcoming referendum on UK
membership of the European Union to affect the MPC’s
projections would be inconsistent with its convention that
government policy is followed, such that the status quo
continues.
As set out in a box on page 5, some asset prices are currently
likely to have been affected by market participants’
perceptions about the risks associated with the forthcoming
referendum on UK membership of the European Union. In
particular, there is evidence that the referendum is having a
marked influence on the sterling exchange rate. The evidence
in that box suggests that roughly half of the 9% fall in the
exchange rate since its November 2015 peak might be
accounted for by risks associated with a vote to leave the
European Union. Once the uncertainty over the outcome is
resolved, it is likely that the exchange rate will adjust again,
consistent with market participants’ view of the outlook at
that time.
Following its usual convention, which is to assume that
government policy is followed, the MPC’s May projections
are conditioned on a continuation of EU membership. A
conventional treatment of the depreciation in the exchange
rate would therefore be associated with significant support to
activity but no offset in the projections from the factors that
have led to the weakening in sterling. The box on pages 41–43
describes these possible offsets in the event of a Leave vote,
including the possibility of a weaker UK outlook.
The MPC has therefore taken a judgement not to let that part
of the fall in the exchange rate that appears to have been
associated with the referendum feed through to its growth or
inflation projections. There is considerable uncertainty around
the effects that the referendum is having on the exchange rate
and therefore around this judgement. Table 1 shows how the
projections for growth and inflation would differ if the
exchange rate path were different, all else equal. If the
forecast had been conditioned on an exchange rate path using
the conventional assumptions based on data in the fifteen
days to 4 May, and no other changes were made to the
forecast inputs, growth and inflation would be significantly
higher. Conversely, if it were assumed that all of the exchange
rate fall since November 2015 reflected referendum effects,
growth and inflation would be significantly lower than in the
May central projections. These are mechanical projections
where the only change in the forecast inputs is the exchange
rate path; there is no allowance for the factors that could be
consistent with these different exchange rate paths.
As set out in the box on page 5, the evidence on whether other
asset prices, including market interest rates and equities, have
been affected by the referendum is less clear. Although such
an impact is possible, the MPC has not adjusted its standard
treatment of these asset prices.
Table 1 GDP growth and inflation projections with different exchange rate paths(a)
 Sterling exchange rate Annual GDP growth CPI inflation
 (index: Jan. 2005 = 100) (per cent) (per cent)
 18 Nov. 2015 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018
 Q4 Q4 Q4 Q4 Q4 Q4
Referendum accounts for none of the fall in the sterling ERI 94 85 85 85 2.1 2.5 2.4 1.1 2.1 2.5
May 2016 modal projections 94 89 89 89 2.0 2.3 2.3 0.9 1.8 2.2
Referendum accounts for all of the fall in the sterling ERI 94 93 93 92 1.9 2.0 2.2 0.7 1.5 1.8
(a) Modal projections for calendar-year GDP growth and four-quarter CPI inflation rate.
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 41
Risks associated with the referendum on
UK membership of the European Union
On 6 April, members of the Financial Policy Committee (FPC)
and the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) met to discuss,
and were presented with material on, risks to monetary and
financial stability associated with the referendum on the
United Kingdom’s membership of the European Union. This
box provides a summary of that material, describing some of
the key channels through which those risks could propagate
and potential amplifiers of their impact.
Key channels
The rest of the European Union is the United Kingdom’s
biggest trading partner, comprising around 50% of all
UK trade, and its biggest investment partner, representing
48% of all foreign direct investment (FDI) into the
United Kingdom and 40% of all outward UK FDI (Chart A).
The United Kingdom’s relationship with the European Union is,
therefore, material for the outlook for UK activity, inflation
and financial stability.(1)
One way in which the referendum may affect activity is
through the uncertainty it creates. Ahead of the referendum
there is uncertainty both about the outcome of the vote and
about the outlook for UK activity and inflation following the
referendum. In the event of a vote to leave the European
Union, the period of uncertainty could be prolonged, as the
United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements with other
countries would take some time to renegotiate. During that
period, the ultimate nature and extent of those relationships
and their impact on UK potential growth and incomes would
not be entirely clear.
Activity may also be affected by concerns that the outcome
might reduce the openness of the UK economy and its
long-run potential supply. Alterations to product or labour
market regulation, adjustments in labour flows, changes in the
rate of technology adoption as a result of new arrangements
governing foreign trade and capital flows, as well as the need
to reallocate resources between sectors might all affect the
outlook for UK supply growth and national income, for some
time.
As described in the box on pages 14–15, a period of heightened
uncertainty and perceptions of increased downside risks to the
outlook for UK activity could have a number of implications
for companies’ and households’ spending decisions.
Companies could postpone some investment projects or
recruitment plans until the outlook becomes clearer.
Households too might defer some spending, particularly on
major purchases. The effect would be to depress aggregate
demand and, at least for given supply, to lower domestically
generated inflation.
Indeed, there are signs that the referendum has already begun
to weigh on certain areas of activity. Some survey measures
of investment intentions and consumer confidence have
eased, some IPOs and private equity deals have been
postponed, and corporate credit demand appears to have
softened (Section 2). There was a notable fall in commercial
property transactions in 2016 Q1 of around 40%.
Shifts in risk are in part transmitted, and potentially amplified,
by changes in the prices of financial assets. Greater
uncertainty would tend to push up risk premia — the
compensation required in international markets for the risk of
holding sterling assets. Alongside any perceptions that the
expected return on UK investment may be lower, that would
weigh on the sterling exchange rate and on the prices of other
financial assets, such as corporate bonds and equities.
Any such falls in UK financial asset prices would tend to raise
funding costs for banks and, therefore, interest rates on
UK household and corporate borrowing. That, in turn, would
tend to depress the prices of non-financial assets such as real
estate. The combination of tighter financial conditions and
reductions in the value of collateral against which companies
European Union
United States
Rest of the world
£95 billion
(19%)
£193 billion
(38%)
UK exports
£60 billion
(11%)
£197 billion
(36%)
UK imports
£253 billion
(24%)
£286 billion
(28%)
FDI in the United Kingdom
£240 billion
(24%)
£371 billion
(37%)
UK FDI overseas
£223 billion
(44%) £291 billion
(53%)
£496 billion
(48%)
£404 billion
(40%)
Chart A The rest of the European Union is the
United Kingdom’s biggest trading and investment
partner
Sources and destinations of UK imports and exports and
UK foreign direct investment (FDI)(a)
(a) Total value of imports and exports in 2015. Stock of FDI as at end-2014. Shares in
parentheses; may not sum to 100 due to rounding.
(1) For more details on the interlinkages between the United Kingdom and the European
Union see ‘EU membership and the Bank of England’; www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/speeches/2015/euboe211015.pdf.
42 Inflation Report May 2016
and households can borrow would tend to reduce aggregate
demand, including investment in productive capacity.
As explained in the box on page 5 there is evidence that a
material proportion of the 9% fall in the sterling exchange rate
since its peak in November could reflect referendum effects.
The weight implied by market prices on a significant further
depreciation following the referendum has also increased
markedly in recent months.
Were the United Kingdom to vote to leave the European
Union, it is likely that sterling would depreciate further,
perhaps sharply. In isolation, this would push up import prices
leading directly to higher consumer price inflation. It would
also affect inflation indirectly through a combination of
demand and supply effects.(1) On the demand side, a lower
exchange rate would benefit exports, all else equal, and
discourage spending on imports, boosting net trade. A lower
exchange rate would, however, also reduce real incomes,
lowering domestic demand and so partially offsetting some of
the benefit to aggregate demand. On the supply side, higher
import prices would depress investment somewhat, as a
significant proportion of UK capital spending uses imported
capital goods. Over time, this would reduce potential output.
The overall implications for activity and inflation will depend
on the combined effects of the exchange rate move alongside
the effects of greater uncertainty, particularly concerning the
future degree of openness of the UK economy. This
combination of influences on demand, supply and the
exchange rate could lead to a materially lower path for growth
and a notably higher path for inflation than in the central
projections set out in this Report. The boost to net trade from
a fall in the exchange rate is unlikely to offset the drag on
activity from increased uncertainty and tighter financial
conditions. In contrast, the reduction in inflationary pressure
due to weaker activity is likely to be more than offset, at least
initially, by the boost to inflation from higher import prices
following a fall in the exchange rate.
Potential amplifiers
Those pressures have the potential to reinforce existing risks to
financial stability. One existing vulnerability that could
amplify the size of the impact on UK asset prices, and the
exchange rate in particular, is the elevated UK current account
deficit (Section 2). The UK current account deficit has
increased in recent years and is very high by historical and
international standards (Chart B). The financing of the deficit
has been reliant on continuing material inflows of portfolio
and foreign direct investment (FDI), including the financing of
the public sector financial deficit and corporate investment
such as commercial real estate. Those portfolio and FDI
inflows accounted for around 16% of GDP in 2015, of which
the European Union was a significant contributor. Excluding
derivatives, the outstanding stock of foreign claims on the
United Kingdom is around four times the size of annual GDP.
On the other side of the external balance sheet, however, the
United Kingdom has a broadly similar stock of claims on
foreign assets that could be drawn down in order to fund the
deficit.
Increased perceptions that the outcome of the referendum
could lead to a weaker outlook for UK national income may
call into question the ability to maintain the current large scale
of capital inflows. An abrupt decline in capital inflows could
pose a major financing difficulty for the United Kingdom,
particularly if it were also associated with investors attempting
to reduce their existing holdings of UK assets. That would put
significant additional downward pressure on the exchange rate
and asset prices, which in turn would amplify the impacts on
inflation and activity described above.
Another amplifier of those risks could be through the UK
banking system. The results of the 2014 stress test of major
UK banks suggested that the banking system was resilient to a
severe scenario in which there was an abrupt change in capital
flows, a sharp depreciation of sterling, a marked increase in
unemployment, sharp falls in the values of commercial and
residential real estate, and a prolonged recession.(2) Since
then, UK banks’ resilience has increased further.(3) Short-term
wholesale funding represents only around 15% of major UK
banks’ liabilities and is well covered by their holdings of liquid
assets (Chart C). The Bank’s Sterling Monetary Framework
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
2006 09 12 15
Percentages of nominal GDP
+
–
Secondary income
Primary income
Trade balance
Current account balance
Chart B The UK current account deficit is very high by
historical standards
UK current account
(1) For a discussion of the factors affecting the pass-through of changes in the exchange
rate to inflation see Forbes, K, Hjortsoe, I and Nenova, T (2015), ‘The shocks matter:
improving our estimates of exchange rate pass-through’, External MPC Unit Discussion
Paper No. 43; www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/externalmpc/
extmpcpaper0043.pdf.
(2) For more details on the 2014 stress test, see ‘Stress testing the UK banking system:
2014 results’ and the December 2014 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/results161214.pdf and
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2014/fsrfull1412.pdf.
(3) For an assessment of the resilience of the UK banking system see the March 2016
FPC Record; www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/records/fpc/pdf/
2016/record1604.pdf. 
 Section 5 Prospects for inflation 43
would be able to provide sterling liquidity in the event of a
shock.
There is a possibility that heightened uncertainty could test the
capacity of core funding markets at a time when the liquidity
of these markets had shown signs of fragility across advanced
economies. Around half of banks’ short-term wholesale
funding is denominated in foreign currency (Chart C), much of
which is used to finance their foreign currency exposures.
Against that, banks’ holdings of foreign currency denominated
liquid assets have increased in recent years and would be
enough to cover their short-term wholesale liabilities. The
Bank would continue to offer foreign currency liquidity
insurance via its regular weekly US dollar repo operations. The
Bank also has swap lines in place with the Bank of Canada, the
Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve,
the Swiss National Bank and the People’s Bank of China. Many
banks with foreign operations will also have direct access to
the liquidity facilities of the central banks in those countries.
These arrangements serve as a prudent liquidity backstop. The
Bank will continue to monitor market conditions carefully and
keep its operations under review.
Alongside any adverse effect on bank lending, financial
conditions for companies could also deteriorate if capital
market liquidity were to diminish. The stock of corporate
bonds represents a significant proportion of total corporate
borrowing. Increases in risk premia and sudden changes in
capital flows may be associated with increases in corporate
bond liquidity premia — the compensation that investors
require for the risk that they may not be able to trade the bond
easily in the future. Indeed, market liquidity has been fragile in
recent years and sensitive to changes in sentiment.(1) An
increase in liquidity premia associated with uncertainty around
the referendum could push up the spreads on corporate bonds,
reducing their value and increasing the cost of raising finance
for companies.
A further amplifier would be if referendum-related effects
spilled over to the euro area, increasing uncertainty and risk
premia there. That would weigh on euro-denominated asset
prices and on the prospects for euro-area growth, in turn
reducing the demand for UK exports and diminishing the
benefits for UK activity from any depreciation in sterling. It
would also increase the cost of obtaining euro-denominated
funding for banks and companies and could lead to losses on
banks’ euro-denominated assets. These dynamics in one of the
world’s largest economies could contribute to more
generalised risk aversion in financial markets with further
knock-on effects.
Conclusion
The referendum on UK membership of the European Union
poses a number of risks to the outlook for UK activity, inflation
and financial stability. The impact on growth and inflation will
be sensitive to the wide variety of interacting factors. The
possible effects of these dynamics on asset prices (Section 1)
and spending (Section 2) are likely to make macroeconomic
and financial market indicators less informative over the next
few months.
A period of heightened uncertainty accompanied by a
significant fall in the exchange rate would have a range of
effects on inflation, demand and supply, possibly creating a
more challenging trade-off for the MPC. The MPC would have
to make careful judgements about the net effects of these
influences on demand, supply and inflation. Ultimately,
monetary policy would be set in order to meet the inflation
target, while also ensuring that inflation expectations remained
anchored.
At its March meeting, the FPC assessed that, of the near-term
domestic risks to financial stability, those around the
referendum were the most significant. It will continue to
monitor the channels of risk closely and support mitigating
actions where possible. In particular, the FPC welcomed the
Bank’s announcement on 7 March that it would offer three
additional indexed long-term repo operations to provide banks,
building societies and broker-dealers with an opportunity to
obtain liquidity against the full range of collateral eligible in the
Bank’s Sterling Monetary Framework.
Whatever the outcome of the referendum, the FPC and MPC
will use their tools to meet their financial and monetary
stability remits over time.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Total assets(b) Total liabilities(b) Liquid assets Short-term
wholesale
liabilities(c)
Sterling
Foreign currency
£ trillions
Chart C Foreign currency funding is a significant
proportion of UK banks’ liabilities
UK banks’ balance sheets by currency(a)
(a) Data for the seven largest UK banks, UK-resident entities only.
(b) Total assets (liabilities) includes gross reverse repo (repo) and group lending (funding).
Total foreign currency assets (liabilities) calculated as total assets (liabilities) less sterling
assets (liabilities). Sterling assets and liabilities include foreign currency swaps.
(c) Wholesale funding with a maturity of three months or less. Shown on a net repo basis and
excluding group funding.
(1) For more details on the risks associated with financial market liquidity see
pages 16–18 of the July 2015 Financial Stability Report;
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/fsrfull1507.pdf. 
44 Inflation Report May 2016
Other forecasters’ expectations
This box reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey
of external forecasters, carried out in April.(1) On average,
respondents expected four-quarter GDP growth to remain a
little above 2% over the next three years (Table 1), slightly
weaker than expected three months ago.
There is uncertainty around comparing projections in this
survey as individual forecasters may have incorporated the
possible economic impact of the UK referendum on
EU membership in different ways. Perhaps reflecting that, the
range of external forecasters’ expectations of GDP growth in
three years’ time widened further (Chart A). On average,
respondents projected that the sterling ERI would be 2%
higher than its current level by 2017 Q2, although the range of
projections was wide, with some forecasters assuming it would
be nearly 8% higher.
Respondents’ average central expectation for CPI inflation in a
year’s time was 1.6%, broadly similar to the MPC’s projection.
On average, external forecasters placed a weight of around
three quarters on CPI inflation being below the target in a
year’s time, although the weight placed on very low inflation
has fallen a little (Chart B). External forecasters placed
broadly equal weight on inflation being either above or below
the target in two and three years’ time.
External forecasters, on average, projected that Bank Rate
would rise more gradually than projected at the time of the
February Report, with an average expectation of 1.9% in
three years’ time. This remains materially higher than the
path implied by market interest rates (Chart C).
Table 1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections(a)
 2017 Q2 2018 Q2 2019 Q2
CPI inflation(b) 1.6 2.0 2.1
GDP growth(c) 2.2 2.2 2.1
LFS unemployment rate 4.9 4.9 4.9
Bank Rate (per cent) 0.8 1.3 1.9
Stock of purchased assets (£ billions)(d) 375 373 369
Sterling ERI 87.5 87.9 87.6
Source: Projections of outside forecasters as of 28 April 2016.
(a) For 2017 Q2, there were 27 forecasts for GDP growth and CPI inflation, 26 for the unemployment rate and
Bank Rate, 18 for the stock of asset purchases and 12 for the sterling ERI. For 2018 Q2, there were
23 forecasts for CPI inflation, 22 for GDP growth and the unemployment rate, 24 for Bank Rate, 16 for the
stock of asset purchases and 11 for the sterling ERI. For 2019 Q2, there were 22 forecasts for CPI inflation
and GDP growth, 23 forecasts for Bank Rate, 21 for the unemployment rate, 16 for the stock of asset
purchases and 11 for the sterling ERI.
(b) Twelve-month rate.
(c) Four-quarter percentage change.
(d) Original purchase value. Purchased via the creation of central bank reserves.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16
Average of external forecasters
Percentage changes in output on a year earlier
Range of external
 forecasters
Chart A The range of external forecasters’ GDP growth
expectations has widened
Forecasters’ central projections of three year ahead GDP growth
Source: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports from February 2010 to
May 2016.
February 2016 Report
May 2016 Report
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
<1.0% 1.0% to
1.5%
1.5% to
2.0%
2.0% to
2.5%
2.5% to
3.0%
>3.0%
Two years ahead
One year ahead
Proportion of respondents, per cent
Chart B Expectations of very low inflation in a year’s
time have fallen a little
Average probability of CPI inflation outturns(a)
Source: Projections of outside forecasters provided for Inflation Reports in February and May 2016.
(a) Projections on the boundary of these ranges are included in the upper range, eg a projection of
inflation being 2.0% is in the 2.0% to 2.5% range.
(1) For detailed distributions of other forecasters’ expectations, see ‘Other forecasters’
expectations’ on the Bank’s website, available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/mayofe.pdf.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2017 Q2 2018 Q2 2019 Q2
Forward interest rates(a)
Interquartile range of external forecasters
Range of external forecasters
Per cent
Chart C Forecasters project a broadly higher path for
Bank Rate than that implied by market prices
Forecasters’ central projections of Bank Rate, and forward
interest rates
Sources: Projections of outside forecasters as of 28 April 2016, Bloomberg and
Bank calculations.
(a) Estimated using instantaneous forward overnight index swap rates in the fifteen working
days to 4 May 2016. 
 Index of charts and tables 45
Index of charts and tables
Charts
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.1 International forward interest rates 1
1.2 Implied volatility for US equity prices 2
1.3 International three-year forward interest rates 2
1.4 Five-year, five-year forward nominal interest rates 4
1.5 Contributions to the fall in five-year, five-year forward
nominal interest rates since mid-2015 4
1.6 Sterling exchange rates 4
1.7 US dollar oil and commodity prices 6
1.8 International corporate bond spreads 6
1.9 International equity prices 6
1.10 UK equity indices for selected sectors 7
1.11 Indicative long-term UK bank funding spreads 7
1.12 Contributions to cumulative change in GDP since
euro-area pre-recession peak in selected countries 9
1.13 Monthly changes in US employment 9
Asset prices and the referendum on membership of the
European Union 5
A Cumulative change in sterling since 18 November 2015
and estimated referendum impact 5
B Difference between implied volatilities from call and
put options by currency and maturity 5
2 Demand and output 10
2.1 Output growth and Bank staff’s near-term projections 11
2.2 Contributions to average quarterly GVA growth by
output sector 11
2.3 Financial balances by sector 12
2.4 Contributions to annual consumption growth 13
2.5 Household deposit and lending interest rates 13
2.6 Measures of consumer confidence 13
2.7 House building and investment in new dwellings 15
2.8 Mortgage approvals for house purchase and housing
transactions 16
2.9 Business investment 16
2.10 Volatility of, and degree of past revisions to,
growth in expenditure components 16
2.11 Lending to UK non-financial businesses 17
2.12 Imports and exports 18
2.13 UK current account 18
Uncertainty and GDP growth 14
A Range of uncertainty measures 14
B Indicators of uncertainty 14
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.1 Wage Phillips curve: wages and unemployment 19
3.2 Employment rates for selected age groups 20
3.3 Weekly hours worked: actual and usual 20
3.4 Decomposition of four-quarter GDP growth 21
3.5 Measures of labour productivity 21
3.6 Unemployment rate and Bank staff’s near-term
projection 21
3.7 Unemployment rates by duration 22
3.8 Survey indicators of capacity utilisation 22
3.9 Average weekly earnings: real and nominal 22
3.10 Agents’ company visit scores: average expected
change in labour costs for selected industries 23
4 Costs and prices 24
4.1 CPI inflation and Bank staff’s near-term projection 24
4.2 Contributions to CPI inflation 25
4.3 CPI inflation and measures of core CPI inflation 25
4.4 Sterling oil and wholesale gas prices 26
4.5 UK import and foreign export prices excluding fuel 26
4.6 Measures of unit labour costs 26
4.7 Decomposition of four-quarter whole-economy unit
labour cost growth 27
4.8 Measures of domestically generated inflation (DGI) 27
4.9 Private non-financial corporate profit share
(excluding the oil sector) 28
5 Prospects for inflation 29
5.1 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 30
5.2 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate
expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 31
5.3 CPI inflation projection in February based on market
interest rate expectations and £375 billion purchased
assets 31
5.4 World GDP (UK-weighted) 34
5.5 Consumption to labour income 35
5.6 Productivity 36
5.7 Unemployment projection based on market interest
rate expectations and £375 billion purchased assets 37
5.8 Unit labour costs 37
5.9 Projected probabilities of GDP growth in 2018 Q2
(central 90% of the distribution) 38
5.10 Projected probabilities of CPI inflation in 2017 Q2
(central 90% of the distribution) 38
5.11 Inflation probabilities relative to the target 39
5.12 GDP projection based on constant nominal interest
rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased assets 39
5.13 CPI inflation projection based on constant nominal
interest rates at 0.5% and £375 billion purchased
assets 39
Risks associated with the referendum on UK membership
of the European Union 41
A Sources and destinations of UK imports and exports
and UK foreign direct investment (FDI) 41
B UK current account 42
C UK banks’ balance sheets by currency 43
Other forecasters’ expectations 44
A Forecasters’ central projections of three year ahead
GDP growth 44
B Average probability of CPI inflation outturns 44
C Forecasters’ central projections of Bank Rate, and
forward interest rates 44
46 Inflation Report May 2016
Tables
1 Global economic and financial developments 1
1.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 1
1.B Policy announcements by the ECB at its March meeting 2
1.C GDP in selected countries and regions 8
1.D Inflation in selected countries and regions 8
2 Demand and output 10
2.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 10
2.B Expenditure components of demand 12
2.C Net finance raised by PNFCs 17
3 Supply and the labour market 19
3.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 19
3.B Employment growth, vacancies and survey indicators
of employment intentions 20
3.C Indicators of wage growth 23
4 Costs and prices 24
4.A Monitoring the MPC’s key judgements 24
4.B Indicators of inflation expectations 28
5 Prospects for inflation 29
5.A Conditioning path for Bank Rate implied by forward
market interest rates 30
5.B Forecast summary 30
5.C MPC key judgements 32
5.D Monitoring risks to the Committee’s key judgements 33
5.E Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal
projections 34
5.F Calendar-year GDP growth rates of the modal, median
and mean paths 37
5.G Q4 CPI inflation 38
The treatment of asset prices in the May Inflation Report
projections 40
1 GDP growth and inflation projections with different
exchange rate paths 40
Other forecasters’ expectations 44
1 Averages of other forecasters’ central projections 44
 Glossary and other information 47
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CDS – credit default swap.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices
index.
DGI – domestically generated inflation.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
RPI – retail prices index.
RPI inflation – inflation measured by the retail prices index.
Abbreviations
BCC – British Chambers of Commerce.
BoJ – Bank of Japan.
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CEIC – CEIC Data Company Ltd.
CFO – chief financial officer.
CIPD – Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development.
CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
CRE – commercial real estate.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EME – emerging market economy.
EU – European Union.
FDI – foreign direct investment.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FPC – Financial Policy Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
GVA – gross value added.
IIF – Institute of International Finance.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
IPOs – initial public offerings.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MSCI – Morgan Stanley Capital International Inc.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
NLW – National Living Wage.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
OPEC – Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
PNFCs – private non-financial corporations.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
PRA – Prudential Regulation Authority.
PwC – PricewaterhouseCoopers.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SMEs – small and medium-sized enterprises.
TLTRO – targeted long-term refinancing operation.
VAT – Value Added Tax.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Symbols and conventions
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in
charts and tables is the Bank of England or the Office for
National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from financial
markets data, are seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may
sometimes differ from the total shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first
observation within the relevant period, eg data for the first
quarter of the year.
Glossary and other information
© Bank of England 2016
ISSN 1353-6737
Printed by Park Communications Limited