INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 14 February 2007 Opening Remarks by the GovernorFor over a year now, GDP growth has been at or above its long-run average. But inflation has picked up. Over the past six months the Monetary Policy Committee has increased Bank Rate from 4.5% to 5.25% so that, as shown in today’s Report, inflation is expected to return to the 2% target in the medium term.In recent months inflation has been remarkably volatile by the standards of the past decade – rising from 2.4% in October to 3% in December, and then falling to 2.7% in January. Looking ahead, inflation is likely to fall back quite sharply this year as lower retail gas and electricity prices enter household bills, in contrast with the substantial rises that occurred last year. These are circumstances in which it is particularly important to look through the short-term volatility. The issue for monetary policy is the balance of risks to the inflation outlook in the medium term.Output growth was strong in the fourth quarter of 2006. Consumer spending has accelerated over the past year and business investment has picked up sharply. The world economy has continued to grow quickly, and some of the downside risks appear to have diminished. Asset prices, and money and credit growth, remain buoyant.Those developments explain why, despite higher official and market interest rates and the rise in sterling’s effective exchange rate, the MPC’s central view has, throughout the past year, remained one of firm economic growth. The new projection for GDP growth is shown in Chart 1 (GREEN CHART) on page 6 of today’s Report. That projection is based on the assumption that official interest rates move in line with market expectations over the forecast period. The path of interest rates assumed for this projection, around 25 basis points above the current level, is shown in the table in the box on page 41. The central projection is for GDP to grow at around its recent rate before moderating
2somewhat towards the end of the forecast period. In the Committee’s view, the risks to output growth around the central projection are broadly balanced.The Committee’s projection for CPI inflation is shown in Chart 2 (RED CHART) on page 8 of the Report, again on the assumption that official interest rates follow market expectations over the forecast period. The outlook over the next year is highly uncertain because of the large impact which reductions in gas and electricity prices are likely to have on CPI inflation. In the central projection, retail gas and electricity prices, taken together, are assumed to fall by 20% over the course of the year. But CPI inflation is sensitive to plausible deviations from that assumption, and the MPC does not pretend to be able to forecast gas and electricity prices with any precision. So please do not think solely in terms of the central projection. Focus on the whole distribution, and, especially, the risks. The extent of short-term uncertainty has been reflected in a widening of the fan chart for the first year of the forecast horizon. Uncertainty about energy prices means that, in the Committee’s judgment, the balance of risks over the next year is to the downside.Looking to the inflation outlook further ahead, surveys of capacity pressures have strengthened. Although there probably remains some slack in the labour market, the Committee’s central view is that, with demand growth remaining firm and the impact of lower energy prices fading, inflation should settle around the target. But there are substantial risks around that view.On the downside, the main risk concerns the possibility that a greater degree of spare capacity in the labour market than assumed in the central projection may, in conjunction with further inward migration, restrain earnings growth and slow the rise of non-energy costs.On the upside, the current squeeze on real take-home pay may lead to greater upward pressure on earnings than in the central projection. And the Committee places some weight on the possibility that inflation expectations take longer to return to the target,
consistent with business surveys and reports from the Bank’s Agents which suggest that more companies are expecting to be able to make price increases stick. The balance of risks to inflation two years or so ahead is, in the Committee’s judgment, on the upside.In present circumstances, with so much uncertainty about the path for inflation, in both the near and medium term, it is not surprising that there are some differences of view among Committee members about both the central projection and the balance of risks.Given the outlook for inflation, the Committee judged that no change in Bank Rate was necessary at last week’s meeting. Your colleagues from the sports pages may, in the space of two weeks, have changed their judgment about the England cricket team from the worst to tour Australia in eighty years to the favourites to win the World Cup, but I am confident that your judgment about the prospects for inflation and monetary policy will be less fickle. Just as 3% inflation did not mean the end of the world was nigh, so 2.7% does not mean that we can ignore concerns about inflation ahead. So the Committee will look through the short-run volatility to the outlook in the medium term, and it remains ready to take whatever action might be necessary.3