Bank of England Inflation Report Press Conference November 2007
Peter Rodgers:Mervyn King:Page 2 Inflation Report Press ConferenceGood morning, and welcome to the Inflation Report Press Conference. I'll introduce my colleagues. On my left Paul Tucker, Executive Director for Markets. On the far right Charlie Bean, Chief Economist and Executive Director for Monetary Policy, and on my right the Governor, Mervyn King.Could you as usual give your names when you get the mics and the names of your organisations? Thank you.Good morning, everyone. Since the August Inflation Report the economic news has been dominated by developments in world financial markets. These have their origins in the state of the world economy. And it's the world economy that shapes the MPC's latest projections.Serious weakness in the US housing market was the trigger for the financial turmoil and tightening of credit conditions that is now underway. But strong growth in Asia, together with limitations on supply, have helped to push up further commodity prices in general and oil prices in particular.The result is that the central outlook for the UK economy in today's report is in the near term one of slowing growth and rising inflation. But further ahead the outlook is for a return of growth to its average rate and inflation to target.In August the Committee judged that movements in retail, gas and electricity prices would lead inflation to fall back to close to the target in the near term. But the committee also judged that some slowing of the pace of output growth was necessary to meet the 2% inflation target in the medium term.
Page 3 Inflation Report Press ConferenceInflation has fallen back to around the target. And although output growth is estimated by the ONS to have remained robust, surveys do now suggest that growth has started to ease.The turmoil in global financial markets has led to a rise in risk premia. As a result there has been some tightening in the supply of credit to both companies and households. The extent of any further tightening and its impact on demand are key areas of uncertainty.Surveys suggest that business investment intentions have fallen somewhat, but remain above their long-run average. With house price inflation easing and commercial property prices falling, residential and commercial property investment are likely to moderate possibly quite sharply. And with tighter credit conditions in the future the personal saving rate is likely to rise, bearing down on consumer spending.The Committee's latest projection for GDP growth is shown in chart 1 on page 7 of today's report. The fan chart combines for the first time the MPC's judgement about the degree of uncertainty associated with the forecast for future growth and that associated with the back cast of past growth. The back cast takes into account the historical pattern of revisions to official data and the information contained in business surveys, as foreshadowed in the August Inflation Report and explained in detail in Charlie's speech on the 31st October.The committee judges that official estimates of output growth over the recent past are more likely to be revised up than down, although the margin of uncertainty is wide.The projection shown in chart 1 is based on the assumption that Bank Rate moves in line with market expectations over the
Page 4 Inflation Report Press Conferenceforecast period. Since August there has been a considerable reduction in the path of Bank Rate implied by market yields, and the sterling exchange rate has fallen.Notwithstanding those changes, the central projection is for growth to slow sharply over the next year, as past rises in Bank Rates and tighter credit conditions push up rates of private saving and push down on rates of investment.Further ahead the central projection is for output growth to recover to close to its long run average rate. But in the Committee's judgement the balance of risks is on the downside.In August the Committee identified an upside risk to the inflation outlook from global commodity prices. And since then both world oil and food prices have risen by more than 10% and UK wholesale gas prices for the coming year have risen by around 20%. These developments will hold back the growth rate of real incomes and moderate consumer spending. But they will also hinder the ability of the economy to expand without pushing up inflation.The committee's projection for CPI inflation is shown in chart 2 on page 8 of the report, again on the assumption that official interest rates follow market expectations.In the central projection, pressures on capacity and the renewed rise in energy prices push inflation up in the near term. But after a period of slower growth with capacity pressures abating, inflation falls back to settle around the 2% target.In the Committee's judgement the risks to inflation are broadly balanced. Further tightening of credit conditions and disturbances in financial markets pose the biggest downside risk
Male:Page 5 Inflation Report Press Conferenceto the outlook. But in contrast to the picture of stable pay growth painted by the Average Earnings Index, the Average Weekly Earnings index points to growing pay pressures. And surveys of inflation expectations have not fallen back as inflation has returned to the target.These developments, and the possibility that energy and commodity prices continue to rise, pose upside risks to the central projection.The Committee judges that the degree of uncertainty about the outlook is greater than in August, and we'll be monitoring the risks closely.Timely surveys of spending and investment, the price and quantity of credit and asset prices will be used to monitor the projected slowdown in domestic demand. Indicators of domestic demand in the United States and Asia will reveal whether the world economy is slowing as the rebalancing that is now clearly underway evolves. And commodity prices, surveys of household inflation expectations and the full range of pay and earnings measures will be used to assess the upside risks to inflation.In comparison with August, the near term outlook is less benign for both inflation and growth.Last week the committee judged that it was appropriate to leave Bank Rate unchanged. There will be some difficult decisions in the months ahead. But the MPC remains focused on meeting the 2% inflation target in the medium term.Let's throw it open to questions now.
Evan Davis:Mervyn King:Page 6 Inflation Report Press ConferenceEvan Davis from the BBC. Two things. Do you worry that the pound may follow the dollar down over the next two or three years, causing an inflation impulse? Because we have domestic imbalances that need correcting, and if growth is to be maintained and the consumer isn't going to be spending, I'm wondering whether exports will need to pick up?A second more general one is whether the fan charts are adequately capturing the different scenarios that might play out over the next few years. I mean the growth fan chart appears to be giving almost no weight at all for example, to the possibility of a recession. In fact it seems - Stephanie (?) pointed out to me - gives the same chance to a 5% growth in two years' time as it does to negative growth in two years' time. I'm wondering whether actually there is a possibility of a scenario with a much bigger probability than 5% that is a kind of self-reinforcing collapse in asset prices, falling demand, recession, and whether you're worried about that at all?There are two different questions there, let me start with the second and in a minute I'll ask Charlie to comment further on the fan charts here. But let me just make one technical point on it, which is - when people use the word recession they tend to mean two consecutive quarters of negative economic growth. That of course is not what the fan chart shows, what the fan chart shows is the growth rate over the previous four quarters. And that is a much more stringent test of whether there is a recession than simply two quarters, because the two quarter either side, or the two preceding and following quarters, may have positive growth which offset the fall in output in the two recessionary quarters. So it's a much more strict definition of whether there is a recession to have a fall in the level of output over a four quarter period.
Page 7 Inflation Report Press ConferenceCertainly we try to ensure that all the fan chart is including the different 'scenarios'. I'm somewhat sceptical about trying to identify a limited number of scenarios. You do have to take into account the big risks, and the Committee have certainly tried to do that.In the short run undoubtedly there is a risk, largely from the world economy, of a bigger downturn than is in the central projection. But I think the big challenge which faces the Committee is that, as yet - and it's true to some extent of the United States - there is a dichotomy between those parts of the economy, whether it's housing or the financial sector, in which you see very clear signs of a change in conditions over the past six months, and the actual hard data on the rest of the economy which hasn't responded in quite the same way. And that's one of the challenges in judging the path of interest rates over the future.On the first question, clearly the United Kingdom for a considerable period of time now has been, if you like, a sort of pale shadow of the issues, which have been confronting the United States and that we too have had a trade deficit which has been much less than that of the United States. And therefore it posed the risk of how the rebalancing would come about.What of course is interesting about the last three months is that the sterling exchange rate has fallen most against the euro. As of today it's more than 4% down against the euro compared with August, whereas it's only about 2% or so up against the dollar. And the effective exchange rate index has indeed fallen back, now 3% today compared with the conditioning assumption in August. So we have already started to see - despite the comments that you often hear about the strong pound against the dollar - we have already seen a fall in of sterling effective
Charlie Bean:Page 8 Inflation Report Press Conferenceexchange rate on average against all other currencies, weighted by the importance of trade with those currencies over the past three months. And in the case of the United States we are seeing already that the fall in the dollar, where there has been a much bigger fall in the effective exchange rate now over 30% in the last three years, that has had a very marked impact on its trade position, with export growth in volume terms in double digit levels, and the trade deficit falling.So I think that one of the big challenges, looking ahead for the UK economy, is that we are in a world economy where the rebalancing that we have talked about for a very long time is already now underway. And that does pose challenges in terms of tensions between currencies and also question marks over current levels of asset prices.Charlie, do you want to talk about the fan chart and scenarios?Well the thing I would first say is - remember the fan chart only covers 90% of the distribution, and there's another 10% out there in the white part of the fan chart. It's very difficult to put probabilities on events when you're that far away from the central projection, which is why we don't try to be specific about the shape of the distribution in the tails.The point the governor has made about the usual use of the term recession and the fact that the fan chart covers four quarter growth is an important one. The normal term that commentators use to describe a recession, namely two successive falls in quarterly growth, is perfectly consistent with there being positive growth over the year. And there's a substantially higher probability of a recession in the sense of two successive quarters of negative growth in the fan chart than would be implied by simply looking at the four quarter growth rates.
Mervyn King:Chris Giles:Mervyn King:Page 9 Inflation Report Press ConferenceThe other thing I might mention as well is that you were saying that Stephanie had noted that there was as high a chance of 5% growth as growth near zero. Of course if you have relatively low growth one year, a very sharp downturn, it's quite likely that you get a sharp bounce-back subsequently, the sharper the downturn the sharper the recovery very often. So some of the realisations of high growth in the upper end of the fan chart may actually reflect weaker outturns in earlier years.And I think one absolutely key point here is that the scenario you're concerned about - and not without reason - is something that you would not expect to occur once every ten years but something less frequent than that - in which case it would normally be outside the 90% of the fan chart, which is shown here in the coloured band.Chris Giles from the Financial Times. Comparing your forecast with the August inflation report, they do seem considerably more pessimistic given that you've got at least two interest rate cuts in the next year in them. And in August you said one of the main things is that the five interest rate rises so far is going to dampen growth; of course that was known in August then. Have you changed your assessment of that effect on the economy? Or what is the real additional new thing that's changed the forecasts quite dramatically?I mean it's certainly compared with the very small movements we have seen over the last ten years, where we have seen a remarkable degree of stability. This looks like a fairly sharp slowdown, though actually it's not that sharp compared with many of the movements we've seen over the past 30 or 40 years.
Page 10 Inflation Report Press ConferenceThe two things that have changed since August are one, obviously the potential impact of the tightening - considerable tightening of credit conditions on domestic demand and secondly possible slower growth in the world economy, led by a slowdown in the United States where I think the evidence since August has been considerably on the downside.In terms of credit conditions it is very difficult for the Committee to assess the likely impact of this on domestic demand. We have seen, without any doubt, a tightening of credit conditions in terms of both the interest rates at which banks are prepared to lend to companies and households and the quantities which they are prepared to lend as well. That's particularly marked in terms of higher risk borrowers, whether you think of it as households that have experienced adverse credit histories in the past or the riskier types of companies, not investment grade companies.But of course so far we haven't yet seen that map through to a significant change in the effective rates at which companies claim they are able to borrow. And only recently, very recently, have we started to see this show up in investment intentions. It is now beginning to show up in investment intentions. And you can see a slowing in the housing market in both prices and activity.So I think the Committee judges that the slowing that we said in August was necessary is certainly now underway. What is difficult to judge is whether the slowing will turn out in fact to be bigger than we thought in August was necessary to meet the inflation target. And that's something which the Committee will have to judge by looking extremely carefully at the numbers and the data.
David Smith:Mervyn King:Male: Mervyn King:Page 11 Inflation Report Press ConferenceDavid Smith, Sunday Times. Just on that specific point, how much gloomier are you in terms of the growth outlook? If you compared the constant interest rate projection for growth in August with the one now, what order of magnitude is the growth profile down over the period?Well I think you can see if you compare the fan charts, in section 5 - do we have our August one here?No, it's not there.I'm sorry we haven't got the two green fan charts in section 5. I mean you could compare this with chart 5.2, the GDP projection, at constant interest rates. And you could compare that with chart 5.1. And that's broadly the extent of the contrast between August and now.So you can see there is indeed a sharper slowdown. But somewhat more of a recovery later on as the effect of the lower interest rate profile and exchange rate on which this is conditioned compared to the constant rate one. Now this is not exactly the August one, but if you look back at the August report, then you will be able to make the comparison there.I mean it is a sharp slowdown compared with the magnitude of revisions to forecasts that we have typically made in the past five years or so. But that has been a pretty stable period. It's not actually that dramatic compared with the sorts of actual movements in output growth that we have seen over the last 20 years or so. And in some ways it's not dissimilar to the slowdown that we saw in 2005, though of course - as Chris pointed out - it is conditioned on the market yield curve which has a fall in Bank Rate of between 50 and 75 basis points and a 2.5 percentage point fall in the effective exchange rate.
Ashley Seager:Mervyn King:Page 12 Inflation Report Press ConferenceMorning. Ashley Seager from The Guardian. Could you say something about oil prices? They've gone up very, very sharply since August from $70 odd to well over 90; they've quadrupled in the past seven or eight years. Are you assuming that oil is going to keep getting dearer? And what does it mean for UK inflation at the moment and in the future? Obviously the dollar has fallen as well I realise, so if you could say something about that too?What we do is to condition the report on the futures price for all energy prices, both oil and gas and electricity. That is spelled out in the box on page 41. The average oil price over the forecast is 13% higher in dollar terms, a little bit less, but only a little bit less in sterling terms than at the time of the August report. Gas prices are about 20% higher, as I said.These are significant changes, but the price is extraordinarily volatile. And indeed today the price is fractionally below 90. It did reach over 98 during the week of the MPC decision for the last week. So it is extremely volatile. But the very significant demands for energy by the emerging market world are maintaining that price.What is very hard to judge of course is whether growth at that level in those countries will continue. We've seen very strong growth of the world economy now for five years; the chance that it would be as strong and as stable over the next five surely is less than an evens bet. There must be risks that there will be some slowing. But that remains to be seen. And the short run outlook for cost pressures on business clearly has been increased by the movements in energy, oil and other commodity prices, including food prices over the past three months where
Brian Swint:Mervyn King:Page 13 Inflation Report Press Conferencewe've seen quite significant upward cost pressures over that period.Brian Swint, Bloomberg News. A question about the housing market, Governor. I'm a bit confused in the report, on page 19 I think you mention that past rises in house prices may mean that a weaker market now won't feed through as much to weaker consumption. And then later on, I think page 46, you cite the possibility of a weaker housing market as a downside risk to output growth.So I just wanted to ask you - how weak do you think the property market will get in the UK? And how central is that to your projection for slower growth? And how will the Bank respond to it?Well I think in part the housing market indicates what is happening to confidence and sentiment more generally, and therefore it's not necessarily a causal influence on what's happening to consumer spending, but it may be an indicator of what's happening.If you look at page 15 and table 1A that sets out a range of housing market indictors and illustrates that you can clearly see some weakening in activity. If you look at mortgage approvals, they have fallen back since the fourth quarter of last year quite steadily quarter by quarter, but they are still at the same level as the average since 2000. So it's not yet turned into a significant downturn in the housing market.Some of the other leading indicators, particularly in the RICS survey that attracted a good deal of attention in the past couple of days do look particularly weak, both in terms of - well particularly in terms of actual and expected movements in house
Page 14 Inflation Report Press Conferenceprices. New buyer enquiries fell between the second and third quarters, but they didn't really fall significantly further between the third and fourth quarters. There are still mixed signs and we'll have to monitor carefully.But I think the point that's made earlier is that I think people very often jump too quickly to the assumption that a downturn in house prices, or a sharp slowing in house price inflation, will lead to a significant impact on consumer spending. For the reasons we spelled out before we don't think that necessarily follows. You have to ask the question - why is the housing market slowing? And it may be a symptom of a more general tightening of credit conditions which itself will have a direct impact on consumer spending. And that's what the report basically is arguing.But in itself, since we think the major impact of house prices on consumer spending is through the collateral effect, that is it makes it possible for homeowners when they have positive equity in their home to borrow more cheaply through secured borrowing than through unsecured borrowing to finance spending once house prices have risen to a level and have been increasingly quite rapidly you need quite a significant fallback in house prices to erode the cushion of equity which most owner occupiers have in their home. And therefore that collateral is still available.So I think we feel here and we talk about it in the report, that the major impact on consumer spending is not a causal one from the housing market to consumer spending, but it's really a change in the degree of credit conditions - very likely - one of the things the report points out is that during the period when interest rates were being increased - Bank Rate was raised five times - only about one half of the increase in Bank Rate fed
Heather Stewart:Mervyn King:Page 15 Inflation Report Press Conferencethrough to effective mortgage rates and the rest were compressed by a great deal of competition and keen pricing shall we say in the mortgage market. And I think the Committee has judged that there will be somewhat less keen pricing in future than there was then and that is likely to be a permanent feature. And that permanent increase will persuade households to cut back on consumption as the effective interest rate at which they can borrow and save is a bit higher in the future relative to Bank Rate than it has been in the past.So it's not a causal factor but it's an indicator of other changes in capital markets.Heather Stewart from the Observer. Given that the CPI fan chart makes it look as if inflation is bang on target given market rates which are whatever two or possibly three cuts, I guess the question is - why not cut rates already? And in the summary of the discussion on page 10 it says - there are a couple of comments - a cut in rates could be misinterpreted as a signal that monetary policy was focused on supporting the financial system and not meeting the inflation target. Where you so concerned about not looking to be bailing out the banks that you've not cut rates when you ... ?No and that was a consideration that was much more relevant in September and possibly October. But what was confronting the Committee last week - and you'll see the full discussion of the Minutes they then come out next Wednesday - I think were three factors. One, that in August we had said that we wanted to see some slowing. Actually the official output data since then were a bit stronger not weaker. So we wanted to see how far this really was going to feed through to activity. And really we expect a slowing, but the question is - is the slowing that we expect to
Page 16 Inflation Report Press Conferencesee, or that we're going to see, bigger than the slowing that we had wanted to see?Secondly, you clearly see in financial markets the change in credit conditions. What is striking is that for most of the surveys, not all, but for most of the surveys it's quite hard to find evidence of businesses saying that their ability or willingness to invest has been affected so far by the change in credit conditions. And although we're beginning to see now some change in the effective interest rates on mortgages - which on average are about - a fixed rate mortgage is about a third of a percentage point up, on standard variable rate mortgages no change at all - some small change, it's not markedly so yet. And retail sales were very strong in the third quarter.And the third factor, and the one that I think is of most concern, is that we've seen some upside movement in inflation and there are in the short term expectations - the central projection has inflation rising above target over the next months and up to a year before coming back. And we haven't yet seen inflation expectations, as measured in the surveys, fall back as we might have hoped when actual inflation fell back from the figure of 3.1% in March to below 2% in September and 2.1 in October.So that fallback in actual inflation hasn't yet been mirrored in the fallback in inflation expectations. That I think was bound to make the Committee cautious and this is something where we will look at the numbers very carefully. I think we're in a position now where we are trying to describe the outlook in terms of adjectives is less helpful than in terms of numbers. And it's the precise numbers that are going to be crucial. So when people say well is it a matter of time before you do something, I think I'd say it's a matter of data, not a matter of time but a matter of data.
Stephanie Flanders:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders:Mervyn King:Page 17 Inflation Report Press ConferenceStephanie Flanders, the BBC. You talk about the financial turmoil in the last few months and obviously to the extent that it has revealed flaws in the institutional arrangements in the UK that could affect confidence in the financial system going forward. I wonder if you could tell us when the Bank - became clear in its own mind that there was a problem with the arrangements for retail depositors in the event of bank runs such as we've seen with Northern Rock, and when and how that concern was expressed to the government or the Treasury?I know it's a very interesting question and I know why you're interested in it. But I really think they'll be plenty of other opportunities to discuss that, not least when we go to the Treasury Committee in December. So I don't think it's actually germane to the inflation report. But have another question on the inflation report.So you don't think - well okay a variation on that - do you think there will be any long term effect on confidence in the UK financial system from the events of the last few months?No I don't. And I say that because the underlying structures I think are sound. And I think, you know, it's understandable that in the current climate, when we're still going through the adjustment of financial markets that the rather febrile nature of all the comments and the concern is there. But I believe that once we get through that people will look back and they will realise that the underlying structures are sound and the economy will come through as the central projection suggests.In this central projection today what we have is a picture in which there is a slowing of growth in the short run, there is a rise of inflation in the short run. But looking further ahead to the two
Larry Elliott:Mervyn King:Page 18 Inflation Report Press Conferenceto three year horizon, growth returns to its average rate and inflation returns to target. And it's the job of the Monetary Policy Committee to do its best to make sure that happens.Larry Elliott of the Guardian. Obviously there has been quite a few MPC meetings since you were formed back in '97. It seems to me from what you're saying here that you consider 2008 probably to be the most difficult year for the economy since you actually were given independence. Is that right? I mean you're talking about quite a sharp slowdown in the economy and a marked risk of higher inflation. I can't remember that sort of combination being there since '97, so maybe you'd like to comment on that?And secondly, when you talked about the fact that it was kind of patchy - what was happening out there in the economy and that parts of it were showing more signs of stress than others, i.e. the housing market and the financial sector -isn't the UK particularly vulnerable in both those areas, because quite a lot of the growth that we've seen over the last ten years and particularly over the last few years has been either based around consumption from the housing market - based on a strong housing market - or around the strength of the financial and business sector, which accounted for something like nearly 50% of the growth in the year to the second quarter of this year, something like 1.3 points of that 3% growth. So isn't the UK particularly vulnerable, more vulnerable than any other Western developed country, to this slowdown in the financial markets?Well on the first one I think it's always the next year that's the most difficult year. And that's true every year. We've always faced challenges and problems. And these are no different in some ways. The challenges we face are very clear; it's quite hard to put numbers on and to work out what the change in
Page 19 Inflation Report Press Conferencecredit conditions actually implies; that's the real problem in making a forecast at present. That's why we need to monitor the data exceptionally carefully, because it's very hard to theorise and say - what do we think this change in credit conditions will mean for the magnitude of the growth rate and its effect on inflation?In terms of the UK being more vulnerable, I'm not entirely convinced of that. Let me take the second point you made and then come back to the housing market. On the second one, I think you only get that impact of the financial sector on growth if you ignore the fact that that measure in the official statistics includes the difference between lending and borrowing rates of the banking sector. And if you adjust for that, which I think is the appropriate National Accounts treatment, you get a much smaller figure.And indeed one of the investment banks reported recently that in their judgement the contribution - the proportion of GDP which comes out of the activities in the City which correspond to the areas where we've seen difficulty is no more than about 3%. So this is not I think a large factor for UK GDP. And once you get outside London you find people have a very different view about all this.On the first one, I think it's very difficult to judge. I think as I said before I think we are seeing now quite a significant impact in terms - at least in some of the surveys of the housing market. In some ways of course we very much needed to get away from a period a year ago in which house prices were rising so quickly, back again in double digit levels and in which most of the activity indicators were well above their long run average. So we needed a cooling in the housing market; we've seen that. How
Page 20 Inflation Report Press Conferencefar that will go remains to be seen and it's almost impossible to judge that.I think much of the growth of consumer spending in the years between '97 and 2003/2004 was based not so much on the housing market but more on a rapid growth of real disposable incomes. And that was very much supported by an improvement in the terms of trade as we - more than any other country I think - benefited from cheap imports from China and other countries in Asia producing manufactured goods that we imported.That I think is no longer happening; the terms of trade are no longer moving in our favour, partly because inflation in China has picked up and they are no longer able to lower the prices that we are buying those goods from them at that same rate that they were. And of course the increase in energy prices, the impact on food prices, growth in the world economy has also offset from our point of view the improvements in the terms of trade. And there has been an increase in the effective tax rate. All of that has meant a slowing in the growth of real disposable incomes. And we've seen that in the last few years.I think the Committee's judgement in this report is that the further slowing that we expect to see here to consumer spending is coming from an adjustment which will have only a finite life; it's an adjustment of saving rates in which the higher effective borrowing rates, tighter credit conditions will lead households steadily now to raise saving ratios. But by the end of the forecast period here that adjustment in saving ratios has broadly come to an end and then growth both in consumer spending and in output can return to more normal long run levels, not back at the heady heights of the late 90's and early 2000's, but something closer to the growth rate of GDP.
Scheherazade Daneshkhu:Page 21 Inflation Report Press ConferenceSo it is a temporary slowdown but it's an adjustment that I think was necessary. And of course the interesting question is how far we will be able to see a rebalancing in which we will see a pick up in exports and improvement in our trade position. It's interesting that the United States for example has now seen, for the first time, a year in which net trade made a positive contribution to economic growth - for the first time for a decade.Usually I come and tell you that we've had yet again another negative contribution from net trade to economic growth and it's broadly neutral in our forecast. At some point I very much hope that we will see a positive contribution to growth, because that will be necessary in order to reduce the trade deficit which has now risen again in the latest quarterly data, though I think one has to be very cautious before attaching much weight even to quarterly data on trade. The figures are very difficult to interpret and pretty volatile.So I don't think I regard the UK as being particularly exposed. But whether or not it is, what matters is that we focus on the numbers and take the appropriate policy steps to ensure that looking further ahead we get inflation back to target and then growth will be able to return to its normal average rate.Scheherazade Daneshkhu, Financial Times. How likely is it do you think that we might be in for a period of stagflation, however you would like to define that, but a scenario in which rising demand for commodity and food from still fast growing emerging economies pushes up inflation while the credit squeeze reduces growth here?
Mervyn King:Scheherazade Daneshkhu: Mervyn King:Page 22 Inflation Report Press ConferenceAnd secondly this time five years ago we knew that you were going to be King of the Bank, would you like a second term as governor?Well let me dispose of that second question first. I mean, to be perfectly honest, I think everyone involved in all this including myself has had more important things to worry about in the past three months than that. And you know we are talking about next July; that seems an awfully long way away in terms of what's going on in the financial markets. I mean this can wait until the New Year and I think it should.On the first remind me again, Scheherazade the first - the key word?Stagflation.Oh yes, and it's not a word I intend to use. And you'll have to define it in the way that you wish. After all Evan and Stephanie suggested that there wasn't very much stag in the central projection here, and as Charlie pointed out it's always a risk because it's outside the main fan chart.Clearly there will be - this is a forecast in which over the next year we see slowing growth and rising inflation as the central projection. That doesn't mean to say that either will necessarily occur. And that is something, which is not an outcome we've seen very often in the past ten years. It's one associated more traditionally with the supply shocks of the past. But it does reflect the impact on energy and other commodity prices including food as well as the slowdown in the UK from the change in credit conditions.
Sam Fleming:Page 23 Inflation Report Press ConferenceI don't think in the great scheme of things this is a tremendously severe slowdown. But we can't honestly know. I mean I think the central projection has a probability of occurring of close to zero as I've always said. What is much more important is not that we pretend to know exactly what will happen. The broad directions I think we spelled out here. What is much more important is that we monitor the data month by month and take the appropriate policy steps to achieve the result that we see portrayed in the central projection here, which is that by the end of the forecast horizon, growth has recovered from its slowdown and inflation is back at the target again. That's what we'll have to do.But I don't think anyone can honestly make an accurate forecast here, because we've seen in the last six months that, having been through a period in the United States where the housing slowdown looked quite serious and then didn't look quite so serious because it hadn't fed through to the rest of the UK economy, then we saw the further problems both directly in the housing market with the very large defaults on sub-prime mortgage lending and the feed through of that in a way that I don't think people had fully expected to the wider financial system in the United States, and indeed now elsewhere.So I think one ought to be pretty cautious about pretending to be able to anticipate the future here. We don't claim that. We have qualitative developments - but what we do in terms of interest rates must reflect I think the movements of the data month by month.Sam Fleming from the Daily Mail. On the credit crunch, credit squeeze whatever you want to call it, how far do you think we are now through this process? Have we seen the worst or do
Mervyn King:Page 24 Inflation Report Press Conferenceyou think we could see quite a lot more adverse developments in the banking and financial markets over the coming months?And I wondered as a second question whether you could put people's minds to rest now that there aren’t any more Northern Rocks waiting in the wings to come out and bite them. Thanks.Well you would not expect me to comment on any individual banks of any shape or size and I'm not going to do that. But let me refer you to chart 1.2 on page 11 of the report which goes directly I think to the question that you raised here about how long will this process take.One of the symptoms of the financial turmoil that we’ve seen, though only one symptom, is the spread between three month inter-bank rates and expected policy rates. And this normally is somewhere between 10 and 20 basis points, but you can see from that chart that it jumped up to over 100 basis points in August when the turmoil began in earnest. It’s come back about halfway now. And the forward markets, insofar as we can infer from the forward contracts, expect that this will continue to come back to normal by around the middle of next year. So we'd still have many more months of the stresses that we've seen in financial markets continuing.Nevertheless these forward rates imply that this will gradually be worked through. By around the middle of the next year we’ll be back to the more normal relationship between inter-bank rates and policy rates. And that's true in the US, euro area and the United Kingdom. So at that level I think you can see there is a time profile over which it would not be unreasonable to expect things to come back, though there is a great deal of uncertainty and there is a lot of fragility still there.
Gabriel Rozenberg:Page 25 Inflation Report Press ConferenceI think the bigger risk is not so much in terms of - will the consequences of what’s happened so far suddenly be reversed? Even the losses that have been revealed by banks do need to be seen in perspective. They are still small relative to the total sizes of the profits which banks have made in the last three years, and to their capital cushion. And I think it’s important that that be seen and put clearly into perspective.But the other risk which is out there which is something which is nothing to do with the banking system but which is a wider risk in financial markets, is that the re-pricing of risk that we have talked about for some considerable time now, and which did start significantly again during July and August, hasn’t really fed through to markets such as equity markets. And if there were to be an adjustment of risk premium in equity markets with a fall in asset prices, not just here but around the world, then that could have a bigger impact on the world economy.And it’s very striking that, despite the developments we’ve seen in the past three months, despite the stresses and strains in the banking sector, equity prices on average are still higher. They’re higher now than they were in August; that's true around the world. And in emerging markets they're 20% higher than they were three months ago. There must be some downside risks from that, and that's one of the things which is factored in to the projection here. I think it’s that sort of risk which is the bigger risk to the world economy than the narrower one focused on the banking sector.Gabriel Rozenberg from The Times. Can I ask about why these projections seem so good? We’ve got a situation where we’re all led to believe that the end of imported deflation made it much harder for the Bank to cut rates when hit by an external shock. We’ve had a much greater shock than we expected three
Mervyn King:Page 26 Inflation Report Press Conferencemonths ago, but the inflation profile is pretty close to target, rates can come down quite a bit which is good news for all of us, and by mid '09 it looks like growth will be, in the central projection at least, 2.5% to 3.25% compared to 2.25% to 3% three months ago. So better news all round. And that seems quite surprising. Can you explain why this season you’re singing the good news?Well I'm not sure that everyone would interpret it as good news because it does as you can see from chart one have quite a sharp slowing in output growth. And I think you can see that our own judgement in August and again now is that output had been growing very rapidly, faster than the official data had suggested. So there is quite a marked slow down from the growth rate that we think we're at say in the year to the third quarter, and where we expect growth to get to. But I mean you’re right, as I mentioned earlier in response to Scheherazade, this is not a marked slow down in comparison, or big slow down in comparison with some of those that we’ve seen in the post war period. But it is still a sharp slowing in domestic demand. And the risks are on the downside. So we make clear the risk to activity over the next year or so are on the downside.Inflation does pick up relative to where we thought it would be in August. In August we thought it would be close to the target. Here it’s not that far. I'm very grateful to you for putting in perspective the movements in inflation that we have seen. I mean, sometimes people describe a movement in inflation of 0.2 or 0.3 percentage points as a sort of dramatic movement. As you've said, it isn’t. We do see a pick getting up towards the - not quite up to but up towards the 2.5% level. That is something that people should notice because our target is 2%.
Ed Conway:Mervyn King:Page 27 Inflation Report Press ConferenceWe think that part of the influences we’ve seen in the last few years, whereby movements in inflation outside the energy sector have tended to move in an offsetting direction from movements in costs created by higher energy prices. But that will continue to some extent. But there are plenty of risks and as you say the central projection is not quite as panglossian as we’ve had in many of the past inflation report projections; but nevertheless it’s not one that should make you think this is the end of the world. And I don’t think that's the message we want to give, it isn’t. It is a slowing but then conditioned on the assumptions which are used to generate this chart, including a fall in the exchange rate and including a fall in Bank Rate, growth then recovers at the end of the three year horizon in chart one, gets back to its average rate and inflation is back to target. That's what we hope will be the outcome.But as I said in response to Scheherazade, I do think that from the committee's point of view we can't just produce a chart like this and say oh just look only at the central projection and say - oh things are fine. You have to look at everything else and our job is to keep our eye on it month by month, and adjust policy in order to ensure that the outcomes are close to what is portrayed here in the central projection.Ed Conway from The Daily Telegraph. Governor, you spoke a bit earlier about the forecast being a matter of data rather than adjectives, and in the past few inflation reports you've given an explicit indication of what would have to happen to certain indicators for you to change your outlook on the inflation prospects. I just wondered if you could be more specific in this case as well.Well let me ask Charlie to - this is spelled out in section five where we talk about what indicators we’ll be looking particularly
Charlie:Page 28 Inflation Report Press Conferenceat. And it was also in the part of my opening remarks, but do you want to comment on that, Charlie?Yes. I mean pages 46 and 47 of the report particularly highlight the set of indicators that we'll be monitoring closely to assess whether the various risks which are embodied in the fan charts are crystallising or not because as the Governor's already stressed, it’s not the central projection that matters to us going forward, but it’s whether the risks, either to the upside or the downside, are crystallising.As far as the evolution of demand goes we’ll obviously be looking at direct measures of demand but also, as leading indicators of that, information on developments in credit markets, and the extent to which recent events are leading to a cutback in the supply of credit to households and businesses. So our credit condition survey which we carry out quarterly will be a key piece of information there.The money and credit aggregates as well, although they’re quite difficult to interpret the aggregate indicates at the moment, nevertheless they will also contain information about how lending to households and businesses are evolving. And obviously investment intentions is something that may be useful. So that's in terms of evaluating how the negative demand shock from financial markets is impinging on things.As far as inflationary developments go, obviously we’ll be looking at the developments of global prices, what’s happening in the oil market, why what's happening in the oil market is occurring - because whether it’s a demand or a supply disturbance to the oil price matters quite a lot for oil price prospects. Similarly food prices, again there is it demand factors driving food prices up or is it something reflecting supply
Anusha Bradley:Mervyn King:Faisal Islam:Page 29 Inflation Report Press Conferenceside factors like poor harvests. But we will obviously be monitoring global price developments closely.And then a key issue will be the extent to which any pick-up in global prices feeds through into domestic inflationary developments. And here key indicators are going to be what’s happening to pay. And there are issues about exactly what is happening there because there are divergent signals coming from the average earnings index, the Average Weekly Earnings Index and also the National Accounts wages and salaries measure. So we'll be looking at all three of those to try and gauge what’s happening to pay pressures.And also a key factor which the Governor has already highlighted is the fact that over the past year the increase in energy prices has partly been offset by the setters of other prices having more subdued prices. So we’ll be looking at how those other prices are developing as well.Anusha Bradley City A.M. It’s been a difficult quarter and your actions have been very much in the spotlight. Do you want to serve another term as Governor?Well I answered that question before. None of us have really had a chance to think about it. We have been worrying about more important things. And there hasn’t been a lot of leisure time to reflect on that. This is all for next July, so there's plenty of time to come back to that.Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News. Do you believe, maybe this is a question for Paul Tucker as well, do you believe that the banks are accounting transparently and correctly for losses made both in American sub-prime and in related derivatives?
Mervyn King:Tahni Karrar:Mervyn King:Page 30 Inflation Report Press ConferenceWell I have no reason to believe they’re not and there are a lot of auditors and regulators out there making sure that they do.Tahni Karrar, Middle East correspondent for Zawya Dow Jones. I've got a question about currency and the weakening dollar. A lot of Gulf countries, and there's a lot of speculation that they might be depegging from the dollar, 40 years ago they depegged from the sterling. Given the strong economic ties with countries such as Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries, how would that affect the UK if they depegged from the dollar?Well I think, I mean you touch on what’s a very important issue for the world economy which inevitably therefore will impact on the UK. For a long time economists have talked about the enormous global imbalances - how would these imbalances unwind? They are unwinding now and that is happening as one would have expected with some change in effective exchange rates.The difficulty in the world economic system at present is that a number of the major economies, certainly the G7 economies, have flexible exchange rates and those exchange rates are moving. Others, like China, have linked their currency to the dollar; some small slackening in that but not a great deal and that is causing great currency tensions. And I came away from the IMF meetings in Washington recently more concerned about the implications of these tensions precisely because the unwinding of the imbalances is not just a hypothetical prospect out there, but is happening now. And I think this is a major concern and it's something which I'm sure all of us will want to discuss at the G20 meeting in South Africa over the coming weekend.
Emma Charlton:Mervyn King:Page 31 Inflation Report Press ConferenceSo these are big questions. But if you’re looking for a currency that's got a stable, effective exchange rate you couldn't do better than look at sterling. If you look at the dollar and the euro their effective exchange rates have moved really all over the place in the last ten years. Sterling has been remarkably stable. So whoever it is, people who won't get out of bed to earn dollars, sterling's a pretty good currency to look at.It’s Emma Charlton from Dow Jones. You spoke a little bit earlier about the oil price. Could you just expand a bit more about whether you think that market's being driven by fundamentals or speculation?Well it’s always difficult to know what people mean by speculation. I mean, if it's a market it often makes sense to buy if you think the price is going to go up and sell otherwise. And of course that's exactly what the oil producers themselves have to do in thinking about when is the right time to take oil out of the ground and sell it, as opposed to keeping the oil in the ground.So what I think is a more useful distinction is between demand and supply. And I don't think you can explain what’s happened to the oil price in the past two to three years in terms of restrictions on supply. Temporary movements, that's certainly usually the case. Whether it’s concern about the impact of hurricanes on production in Mexico or the United States or whether it’s political uncertainty affecting production elsewhere.But by and large the main source of increase in energy prices over the last couple of years, slightly more than that now, has been the very strong demand for energy and other commodities based on rapid economic growth in Asia. And twenty years ago the contribution of Asia outside Japan, non-Japan Asia, to world economic growth when we had the last strong period of
Paul Wallace:Mervyn King: Charlie Bean:Page 32 Inflation Report Press Conferenceeconomic growth in the mid 80s, was about a quarter. A quarter of that growth came from non-Japan Asia. In the past five years half of it has come from non-Japan Asia. That's a measure of how much these economies now matter for the world economy, and why it is more difficult I think simply to extrapolate from what’s happening in the United States to the rest of the world economy.Paul Wallace from The Economist. Can you say a bit more about the source of the slowdown by components of demand? Because you say that net trade will be broadly neutral so it’s coming from domestic demand; and how it’s essentially split between household consumption, business investment and also residential dwellings investment?Let me ask Charlie to take that.In principle it’s a mix between the three. Now for the purposes of the Committee agreeing a forecast we don't actually have to sign up to a particular view that it’s one or the other or a particular split. The report does identify three particular groups of spending that might be hit by developments in credit markets.Firstly consumer spending. There may be some reduction in the availability of credit to households but more particularly we think it’s likely that there'll be an increase in precautionary saving by households and that's one strand.Secondly there's a strand to business investment in general which is most likely to impinge on small firms who rely on bank finance rather than bond or equity finance, who will find it potentially more expensive or more difficult to get the finance.
Chris Giles:Mervyn King: Chris Giles:Mervyn King:Page 33 Inflation Report Press ConferenceAnd thirdly, and I think the Committee think that this is one area where there might be more significant effects is on property investment, both for residential purposes and commercial property. Both of those are typically quite volatile components and it’s not implausible at the current juncture to expect them to be hit quite hard. But as I say, the Committee at the end of the day takes a view about the overall impact on demand and different members of the Committee may put different weights on the various possible sources of that slowdown in demand.Chris Giles from The Financial Times. Two quick questions on uncertainty if I may. First of all you say on page 46 that further financial market fallout poses the biggest downside risk to activity. In relation to that and Northern Rock in particular, you've said that the money market operations couldn’t have saved the bank because it wanted too much. You've said that we would find out who was borrowing and so there's a great stigma attached to borrowing from the Bank. Is the Bank's financial stability operations now essentially naked in the face of financial instability in the world? I mean, is it maybe even time to shut it down?And the second question on uncertainty ...Try another provocative one.I will. You've now said you won’t talk about the governorship of the Bank of England until the New Year. Is the uncertainty over the governorship likely to harm the economic activity of the country?Well I must say I find that very hard to believe. I noticed a lot of speculation about many positions like the England football manager, but I really don't think concern about this is something
Paul Tucker:Page 34 Inflation Report Press Conferencethat's affecting industries up and down the country which are actually more concerned about their own business and products, and rightly so. So I don't think that.On the first one, no, we’re not naked. We have all our instruments there and can be operated. The question of stigma is an important question and we’ll return to that in our discussions about how we would handle future financial and banking crises. That's not for today, that's for when we go to the Treasury Committee and further down the road. It’s an issue which not just we but other central banks are also grappling with, because they too have become conscious of this. And it was a problem in the United States as well. So this is a much more general issue.But overall we will be looking at our money market operations and I think we feel they’ve worked extremely well. And the main purpose of those operations is to keep the overnight interest rate as close to the policy rate as possible. And during the months of September and October the average absolute deviation of the overnight rate from the policy rate was lower in the United Kingdom than it was in either the euro area or the United States. But perhaps Paul would like to make a comment on that?Not a great deal more to add other than that the stigma issue is a serious issue. I mean taking the UK out of it, it’s probably the biggest issue to confront central banks internationally from the episode that's been going on over the past few months. As the Governor said, it’s featured in New York, it’s featured in Tokyo. In a slightly different way and in a lower key way, it’s featured a bit within the euro area.In some respects this changes or poses a question about the social contract between the authorities and the banking system
Gary Duncan:Mervyn King:Page 35 Inflation Report Press Conferencewhere central banks provide funds in unlimited quantities against collateral but at a penal rate. And if it’s stigmatised to draw those funds then there is a question about how the system will function over the future. And by the future I mean 10, 20, 30 years. But that isn’t a specific UK issue and it’s one that the central banks internationally will take away.What is absolutely clear is that, as the Governor says, it hasn't interfered with establishing the overnight rate of interest in line with the Bank Rate. Since September when we used the various contingency plans in our published framework the overnight rate has been close to Bank Rate and fairly stable.Gary Duncan from The Times. Could you elaborate, Governor, on how you might reconcile the way you grapple with setting policy in light of the dilemma from weakening growth at the same time as higher inflation? It was always said in the 70's of course that if there weren't second round effects you could look through the impact of oil shocks on inflation. Has the experience of 2005 made the Committee and the Bank any more sanguine about second round effects and so on where there wasn't much evidence of it hitting, passing through into wages and so forth.Well I think it’s rather too early to judge to be honest because as I said inflation expectations which did rise following the rise in energy prices and their feed-through to CPI inflation have not fallen back. So we have not yet been through enough experience I think to judge that. And of course what’s particularly difficult at present is that, if you go back and sort of read the text books about how to think about this, they say - oh there's an energy shock, it’s a one off and that's it and you have to think about how you react to it. Well here we’re faced with energy shocks almost every quarter. Up and then down and
Ian King:Mervyn King:Page 36 Inflation Report Press Conferencethen up again. So there's a whole sequence of shocks which are occurring. And the level overall of oil and commodity prices is still markedly higher than it was in the past. So I think it’s much too soon to be confident that the shocks are over let alone that we've actually seen the full working through of the impact of that on domestically generated inflation.Ian King from The Sun. Can I pick you up on a couple of things that you said earlier? You mentioned to Faisal just now that you’re perfectly happy with the way the banks have been reporting bad debts. That appears to be a contrast with what the IMF have said recently about transparency of reporting, and I find it hard to reconcile with comments that you make on pages 15 and 16 where you say that aggregate lending is difficult to interpret at the moment because of support that the banks are giving to off balance sheet vehicles. So I'd like you to elaborate on that please.And secondly you mentioned just now that you'd found it striking that equity markets had risen since August. Are you saying there that you're surprised, rather than merely struck?I don't think central bank Governors are ever surprised by what's happened in the past looking backwards. I think in terms of the banking sector there are two quite different things. In terms of the impact on the monetary aggregates, it is difficult to interpret what is happening to the monetary aggregates because of potential support to the off balance sheet vehicles. That's a question about judging what’s happening to the economy as a whole and one of the things we will be looking very carefully at is the impact of recent events on money and credit developments.If ever anyone doubted that money and credit were important, I would think that the last few months will have at least
Page 37 Inflation Report Press Conferencedemonstrated to them that they matter a great deal. And we will have to look very carefully at the developments in money and credit in order to judge the impact of the recent financial turmoil on the outlook for the economy.One of the charts that we haven’t referred to yet that is very striking is a chart 2.1 on page 18 which shows that right through to the middle of this year nominal domestic demand was growing very rapidly, nominal GDP was growing rapidly. Now that's a reflection of the growth, the expansion of money and credit that we'd seen in the earlier years, but we do need to see a slow down. The question is - how far will recent events bring about a slow down that is faster than we thought was necessary in August? That's one issue.The second quite distinct issue I think is the question about reporting by the banks. Now I certainly believe and I think along with the IMF that the sooner it is possible to obtain transparency about the scale of losses and bad loans, the better. However there's not much point in banks rushing to pull out a number only to have to revise it two or three weeks later once the auditors have done their job. It is important for the numbers that come out to be properly audited and to be presented in a proper context.Now I think the banks are very conscious of that because it’s in their own interest to get the news out sooner rather than later, and that is happening. And I don't think that what we’re seeing is markedly different from what we might have expected during the month of August when people looking forward anticipated that it would take time for the inter-bank spreads to come down, that it would take time for banks to accumulate liquidity, to be able to take back onto their balance sheets committed credit lines and commitments to SIVs and conduits, and indeed they
Brian Swint:Mervyn King: Peter Rodgers:ENDPage 38 Inflation Report Press Conferencewould be recognising in due course losses on many of these instruments.I don't think anything that's happened since has been markedly out of line with what you might have expected, and I would urge everyone to see the losses in the context of past profits and the capital cushion of the banks. The big five banks in the UK have made over the past three years about £100 billion of profit. Now for much of the past three years you and your colleagues have been lambasting them for making such large profits and I'm not here to disagree with you. But I would point out that if ever there was a moment when it was helpful for the banks to have made large profits, it must be now, because they will provide the cushion which guarantees the stability of our banking system. And it is strong and stable.Brian Swint, Bloomberg News. Governor the first run on a UK bank took place under your watch. Have you considered resigning?No. That's all we’ve got time for. Thank you very much indeed.