INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 9 August 2006 Opening Remarks by the GovernorOver the past three quarters the growth of GDP has been at, or a little above, its long- term average. And, after falling back to just below its 2% target, inflation has risen to 2.5% in June. Overall, the central view described in this Inflation Report is one of inflation rising further in the near term, before gradually returning towards the target over the forecast period. The risks around that central view seem, to the Committee, greater than in May.Despite an apparently erratic fall in energy output, the preliminary estimate of growth in Q2 was 0.8%. And the prospects for demand and output growth appear firm – a view supported by the very rapid growth of broad money and credit. After a dip in the first quarter, household spending appears to have revived. Business investment too has picked up. And the world economy has grown robustly.There is likely to be some rebalancing of demand in the UK economy over the next few years, an outlook similar to that in May. The central projection for consumer spending is for it to grow at a little below its long-run average rate throughout the forecast period. The revival of business investment is expected to continue and export demand to remain firm.The Monetary Policy Committee’s projection for GDP growth is shown in Chart 1 (GREEN CHART) on page 7 of today’s Report. That projection is based on the assumption that official interest rates move in line with market expectations of a modest rise in rates over the next two years. The central projection is for GDP to continue to grow at around its average rate over the past decade.
2In the Committee’s view, the risks to output growth are broadly balanced. In the short term, the momentum of recent demand growth implies some upside risks. But there are still downside risks from the impact of strong energy and import price inflation on real disposable incomes and consumer spending, and from the world economy.Measures of both consumer and producer price inflation have picked up since the spring. And since May, the announcements of further increases in domestic gas and electricity prices, and further analysis of the likely impact of the increase in student tuition fees, have raised the central projection for inflation over the near term. Those temporary effects are likely to push CPI inflation further above the 2% target for a while.The Committee’s projection for CPI inflation is shown in Chart 2 (RED CHART) on page 8 of the Report, again on the assumption that official interest rates follow market expectations over the forecast period. After the initial near-term rise, the central projection is for inflation to ease back towards the target.In response to rising energy prices, profit margins have been squeezed and companies have borne down on labour costs. A rise in labour force growth reflecting significant inflows of migrant labour has also contributed to subdued earnings growth. Looking ahead, although pay pressures are likely to be constrained by a degree of slack in the labour market, profit margins and pay growth are likely to recover somewhat as energy price inflation moderates.Following the upward revisions to the official estimates of output in recent years, the Committee judges that there has been slightly less spare capacity in the economy than previously thought. Together with the higher near-term outlook, and a slightly greater recovery in profit margins as energy price inflation falls back, that explains why the inflation profile in Chart 2 (RED CHART) is somewhat higher than that in the May Report.
3As always, the probability of the central projection materialising is low. The risks to the outlook for inflation appear broadly balanced, although the Committee judges that the outlook, particularly in the near term, is more uncertain than in May. There remains great uncertainty about future energy prices, especially in the light of political tensions in the Middle East, and inflation is likely to be volatile over the coming months. But the main risks to the inflation outlook in the medium term are the degree of spare capacity in the economy and the extent to which profit margins and pay growth will recover as energy price inflation subsides.Against a background of firm growth and limited spare capacity, and with inflation likely to remain above target for some while, the Committee judged last week that an increase of 0.25 percentage points in the official Bank rate was necessary to keep CPI inflation on track to meet the target in the medium term. It remains ready to take whatever action might be necessary in future.