INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 15 February 2006 Opening Remarks by the GovernorThe picture of the UK economy painted by the latest official data is of a rather shallow slowdown followed by a return to growth of GDP close to its long-term average. Inflation is close to the 2% target, and its recent movements have been dominated by changes in energy prices. The outlook described in today’s Report contains a benign central view of steady growth with inflation remaining close to the target over the forecast period.But, before any of you are tempted to get carried away with the flat profile for the central projection for inflation, let me remind you that the chance that inflation will remain so close to the target throughout the forecast period is negligible. As ever, there are risks to the outlook in both directions, and it is an assessment of those risks which determines the Committee’s thinking about the policy decision.Since the November Report, low long-term interest rates have contributed to a rise in asset prices, both at home and overseas. Equity prices have risen by almost 10% over that period, and almost doubled over the past three years. During the past year the housing market has picked up in terms of both prices and activity. Broad money growth has reached its highest level for fifteen years, and the exchange rate is a little weaker than in November. Those developments are likely to support domestic demand. The slowing of consumption growth appears to have been relatively short-lived, falling noticeably below its long-term fifty year average only during the first half of last year, and picking up thereafter. Whether that recovery will persist, only time will tell.Business investment remains subdued. Cost pressures have lowered profit margins and, despite low long-term interest rates, surveys show few signs of any immediate recovery. World trade in 2005 is likely to have grown at a rate around its long-run average.
2The Monetary Policy Committee’s projection for GDP growth is shown in Chart 1 (GREEN CHART) on page ii of today’s Report. That projection is based on the assumption that official interest rates move in line with market expectations of a broadly flat profile over the forecast period. In the Committee’s judgement, the central view is that consumer spending is likely to grow at around its long-run average rate throughout the forecast period, business investment will recover slowly and net trade is likely to make less of a negative contribution to output growth over the forecast period than it has in recent years.As a result, the central projection is for GDP to grow at around its long-run historical average which implies a recovery in the four-quarter growth rate – shown in Chart 1 - from its low point during last year. That profile is a little stronger over the first year of the forecast period than in the November Report, reflecting a slightly firmer outlook for consumer spending, and a little weaker thereafter.The Committee’s projection for inflation is shown in Chart 2 (RED CHART) on page iv of the Report, again on the assumption that official interest rates follow market expectations of a flat profile over the forecast period. The sharp rise in energy prices over the past two years has contributed to the recent volatility of CPI inflation. The direct effects of higher petrol and fuel oil prices on CPI inflation are likely to unwind over the forecast period, although the extent of any indirect effects remains unclear. And there is particular uncertainty about the future path of domestic gas prices. The central projection is for CPI inflation to remain close to the 2% target throughout the forecast period.There are risks to the central views for growth and inflation – both on the upside and the downside – and on these there are some differences of view among Committee members, but those are small relative to the uncertainty surrounding the central projections. Over the next year or so any volatility in inflation is likely to continue to stem from movements in energy prices. In the Committee’s view, the balance of risks to the path of demand is
slightly on the downside, associated with the outlook for consumer spending and net trade, which poses downside risks to inflation. But, in the Committee’s judgment, there are also upside risks from the path and possible impact of energy prices and the uncertainties about the extent of spare capacity in the economy at present. Output data may be revised and it is difficult to know how far supply capacity has been and will be eroded by higher energy prices. In the Committee’s judgement the risks to inflation are evenly balanced. Given the overall outlook, and the balanced nature of the risks, the Committee decided last week to leave interest rates at their present level. But it remains ready to take whatever action is necessary in order to keep inflation on track to meet the target in the medium term.3