INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 11 May 2005 Opening Remarks by the GovernorIn February, the Monetary Policy Committee argued that the main downside risk was to the near-term strength of consumption. Since then, that risk appears to have crystallised. Weakness in household spending has become more marked and has persisted into this year. Nevertheless, output growth remains close to its long-run average. Moreover, inflation has been stronger than expected, picking up to 1.9%. In today’s Report, the new central projection is for continuing steady growth with inflation remaining close to the 2% target throughout the forecast period. But the chances of the economy evolving exactly in line with our central projection are very small. So the real issue is the uncertainty about the outlook for inflation, where there are risks in both directions.The slowdown in retail spending is more than an erratic movement around the turn of the year. Profit warnings from a number of retailers, business surveys, reports from the high street, and the official data on retail sales all point to an easing of consumer spending. The evidence now suggests that the contribution of consumption to activity growth is lower than for some years. The Committee’s central view is for household spending growth to recover, but to remain below the average of recent years.Overall, however, GDP growth remained around trend, as the growth of the services sector, which represents around 70% of the economy, stayed firm. Chart 1 (GREEN CHART) on page iii of the Report shows the Committee’s latest projection for GDP growth, based on the assumption that official interest rates over the forecast period will move in line with market expectations, which have been broadly flat. The new central projection is a little weaker than in February, especially towards the beginning of the forecast period, though close to its historical average.
2Six months ago CPI inflation was 1.1%; today it is 1.9%. That pickup in inflation has been sharper than we expected. Some of the increase can be accounted for by factors that have only a temporary effect on inflation, such as the impact of higher oil prices. So, although inflation may rise a little further in the coming months, it is then expected to fall back as some of those price level effects drop out of the twelve-month comparison. But some of the increase is judged to reflect the pressure of demand on supply capacity. The Committee’s projection for CPI inflation, again conditional on the markets’ expectation of official interest rates, is shown in Chart 2 (RED CHART) on page iv of the Report. The central projection is that inflation remains close to the 2% target throughout the forecast period.The key question raised by this Report concerns the risks around that central view. The MPC believes that the risks to output growth are slightly on the downside, stemming from possible weakness in activity abroad and consumer spending at home. The slowing over recent quarters in the growth of real disposable incomes, household wealth and house prices is sufficient to explain the decline in household spending growth over that same period. But it does not easily account for the sharp falls in retail sales around Christmas and their failure subsequently to recover, so other factors may be at work. It is impossible to isolate the exact causes. As a result, the prospects for consumption are a key source of uncertainty surrounding the central projection.The Committee believes, in contrast to February, that the risks to inflation are broadly balanced. The downside risk from weaker activity is partially offset by an upside risk from higher earnings growth. Furthermore, the Committee may not have attributed enough of the recent rise in CPI inflation to increased demand pressures, implying a risk of a stronger rise in inflation over the forecast horizon. There is a range of views among members concerning the relative importance of these risks.Given the outlook, the Committee decided at its meeting on Monday that it was appropriate to leave the official interest rate unchanged. It stands ready to respond to the data as they unfold, in order to meet the inflation target in the medium term.