INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 10 August 2011 Opening Remarks by the GovernorSince we last met, the mood in markets has taken a sharp turn for the worse. Much of this reflects rising concern about the sustainability of indebtedness in the euro area and the outlook for growth and fiscal policy in the United States. The outlook for growth in the world economy has deteriorated and, largely as a consequence, near-term growth prospects at home are somewhat weaker.These developments have led to a sharp fall in market expectations of the path for interest rates. As a result, given that path the broad shape of the outlook for the UK is similar to that in the May Report – a modest recovery in activity with inflation rising in the autumn before falling back next year.Over the past year, output, according to initial official estimates, has grown by less than 1%, reflecting a substantial squeeze on households’ real incomes. Underlying growth in the second quarter was probably stronger than the headline figure of 0.2% once we allow for the effect of special factors, such as the additional bank holiday, although the reverse is likely to be true of the third quarter. In the Committee’s view, the weakness in underlying activity is likely to be somewhat more persistent than previously expected.There are a number of headwinds to world and domestic growth over the forecast period, not least the private and public debt overhang. And these headwinds are becoming stronger by the day. Reflecting this, and the prolonged period of economic adjustment facing some countries, the MPC’s projections embody relatively slow growth in the euro area. The intensification of sovereign fiscal concerns has been associated with renewed funding stresses for banks which are contributing to high borrowing spreads, tight credit conditions for households and smaller companies, and exceptionally weak credit and money growth in the UK.
2Nonetheless, four-quarter GDP growth is likely to recover modestly during the second half of 2011 and beyond as the squeeze on real incomes abates and the rebalancing that is underway continues, albeit at an uncertain pace, supported by expansionary monetary policy.The Committee’s judgement about the outlook for GDP growth is summarised in Chart 1, on page 6 of the Report. It is based on the assumption that Bank Rate follows a path implied by market interest rates and that the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves remains at £200 billion throughout the forecast period. That path of rates is on average almost one percentage point lower than in May. The projections are of course also based on the market conditions that prevailed when the forecast was agreed by the Committee last week. Chart 1 shows that, despite the lower path for interest rates, growth in the August central projection is weaker than in May over the first two years of the forecast period, although it returns to slightly above its historical average rate by the end of that period. Overall the Committee’s judgement is that the risks are on the downside.The greatest risks to the prospects for global demand come from the euro area and the substantial challenges faced by several member countries as they seek to ensure the sustainability of their fiscal positions and preserve the stability of their banking systems. To the extent that those risks are already reflected in asset prices, bank funding costs and survey measures of confidence, they will be captured in the MPC’s projections. But beyond that, we see no meaningful way to quantify such risks and they are therefore excluded from the fan charts.Inflation has been pushed up by rises in energy and import prices, and the increase in the standard rate of VAT. It is likely to rise further over the next few months, possibly to 5%, as a result of another round of gas and electricity price increases. Then, from around the turn of the year, it should begin to fall back as the effect of temporary factors dissipates and the margin of slack in the economy, especially in the labour market, persists. The timing and extent of the fallback in inflation are highly uncertain, and are sensitive to further external price pressures, the evolution of firms’ margins, and the extent to which there is upward pressure on nominal wages stemming from the sustained period of above-target inflation.
3Chart 3, on page 8 of the Report, shows the Committee's best collective judgement of the range of outcomes for CPI inflation. It is based on the same assumptions about monetary policy as underlie Chart 1. The central projection for inflation in the medium term is a little below the 2% target, and a little lower than in May, reflecting the somewhat weaker outlook for the level of demand. With the risks remaining to the upside, the chances of inflation being above or below the target are roughly equal.It is almost exactly four years since the start of the financial crisis. The origins of the crisis lie in the large stocks of indebtedness that resulted from the widening imbalances in the world economy, about which nothing was done for so long. One way or another, the losses that were built up in recent years will have to be shared between creditors and debtors; in the world economy between creditors in the East and debtors in the West, and within the euro area between creditors in the North and debtors in the South. The key question is whether that burden sharing will take place in the context of a downturn in the world economy, or whether it will take place in the context of a rebalancing of overall demand.The big risks facing the UK economy come from the rest of the world. We must work with our colleagues abroad to tackle the challenge of how to reduce the overhang of private and public debt. But there is a limit to what UK monetary policy can do when large real adjustments are required. And it cannot influence inflation over the next few months. But it can ensure that policy is set in such a way that these adjustments take place against a backdrop of low and stable inflation. And that is exactly what the MPC will do.