Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 16th February 2011
Q&ALarry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011Governor, if you look at Charts 1 and 3, the profile for GDP growth is pretty jagged; it goes down massively and then rises very rapidly. At the beginning of next year we have what looks like a very sweet spot for the economy, where growth picks up very sharply, and yet inflation drops like a stone. And thereafter both growth and inflation cosy along at a very sort of trend rate of growth.How plausible is that, do you think, given the storms we've seen in the economy over the last three or four years? Are you really saying that, come 2011, the storm is over and the economy is going to be in this nice placid waters where everything ... because that seems to be what the Bank is forecasting, and it just seems to be rather implausible, given what's gone before.No, you've been - you've had the misfortune of attending these press conferences for 20 years now; and you will remember that at virtually every one I have said to you that the chances of the central projection coming true are close to zero. There are enormous risks, but you can't tell which risks will materialise, whether they'll be upside or downside.The point of this is not to pretend that we can forecast the future. We can't. We've never pretended to be able to do that. What we are doing - and we have to do, because there is a lag between when we change our policy setting and it affects inflation - we have to take a judgement about the balance of risks to the outlook in the medium term.And what we try to do in these charts is not to pretend that this is what will happen in any particular respect, but this is our judgement about the balance of risks. In the medium term what
Daisy McAndrew, ITV News:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011we've said here is that, on growth, we judge that the balance of risks around the long run average growth rate are broadly balanced, and the balance of risks to inflation around the target are also broadly balanced, looking some two to three years ahead.Now I think the reason for that is fairly clear. We think that inflation has been pushed up by a number of price shocks that will wane after the middle of this year, that will show up in the official measure in the first half of next year. And by the middle of next year we think inflation will be coming back towards target. The difficult judgement the Committee has to make is not about that broad shape, which I think everyone clearly can understand; it's about - do you think inflation will come back to target? Are the balance of risks on the downside of the target, because of the extent of spare capacity and weak wage growth? Or do you think the risks are on the upside, because of a possible higher inflation expectations [sic] or indeed an increase in wage growth because of real wage resistance?These are really difficult judgements, and it's there that the issue about monetary policy depends.A question about high prices and inflation. We've obviously been listening to you for many months now saying that the pressures on inflation are temporary. On the question of commodity prices, obviously we can see that a drought or a fire is a temporary pressure, but the demand that's coming from emerging markets doesn't look to be so temporary any more. How long can you hold the line that those pressures are temporary?Well, it's not a question of holding a line; this is a question of facts, in terms of what is happening. We're not saying that the level of demand in emerging markets will go down, or that the price
Stephanie Flanders, BBC: Mervyn King: Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011increases that have occurred will necessarily be reversed. But I think that, as I said, in the last three months alone we've seen energy prices up by 15% and food prices by 20% - in just three months.Now in order for inflation not to fall back, you would have to see further increases of the same order of magnitude each quarter over the next year or so. That could happen. There's no way of knowing that; it could happen. But I think a reasonable view on which to set policy is that is not the central case. The balance of risks is that that won't happen, and that CPI inflation will fall back. The very difficult judgement is precisely how far it will fall back, and I think perfectly reasonable to have different views about that.But I don't think it is sensible to say - gosh, you know, it's gone up so much in the last three to six months, therefore this is what determines policy. Policy is not determined by the current rate of inflation; it has to be determined by a dispassionate judgement about the balance of risks. And there is no precision to that; it is a question of judgement, and that's why we have a committee of nine people, each of whom will make their own judgement. And no doubt each of you will make your judgement too.What I would urge on you is to understand that these are difficult judgements, and it's not obvious what the answer to the question is.It's related to that, but sort of wanting to step back a little. Yes.For the first ten years of the Bank's independence in general world price pressures were coming down and the Bank was very good at meeting the inflation target, but so was every other major
Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC: Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011central bank. Now it seem that times have changed, that world prices are going up, and every other major central bank seems to have been able to cope with that. Why has the Bank found it so difficult?Because we have experienced a 25% fall in our nominal effective exchange rate, which has not been experienced by other countries in the industrialised world.In 2007.Yes. And in 2007/2008. And from the beginning of 2009, over the past two years, the exchange rate has been broadly flat. That I think was actually a necessary adjustment of - it's turned out to be an adjustment of 20% on the real exchange rate, which was important to ensure the rebalancing of our economy. And without that we would actually have had a much deeper recession.But aren't you worried? You've stressed in here and in your speeches how important it is for Britain to get a competitive advantage from the fall in sterling. Aren't you worried that that is being lost by the fact that we've had this long period of inflation? That is - we could be frittering away the advantage of the fall in sterling.The frittering away, as you describe it, would occur only if domestic costs and prices were to rise in such a way as to obviate the benefits of the depreciation. That has not occurred. There is no sign yet that wage inflation has picked up. If that were to do so, and it clearly is a risk - indeed in our central projection we have a pick-up of growth rate of earnings in our central projection, to reflect a certain amount of real wage resistance and some pick-up in inflation expectations. If that were to happen to a greater extent than in the central projection, that would pose an
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011upside risk to the inflation target. Equally it is quite possible that that won't happen, and there'll be a downside risk to our central view to inflation.I think the - you know, the big picture that we're seeing is that the fall in the nominal effect of exchange rate has not been frittered away; it is leading to a significant increase in exports - you can see that; it's underpinning the pretty rapid rise in manufacturing output. This is a necessary part of the rebalancing of the economy.Can I ask the extent to which, in this Report today and in your letter yesterday, you are endorsing the market path for interest rates?Well, I'm glad you asked that question, because we're not. We never do. We present our forecasts. We have to present them conditioned on a particular path of interest rates, so you can interpret them. Our judgement is that, along that market path of interest rates, the risks to inflation in the medium term are broadly balanced around the target. But we never pre-announce a decision on interest rates. We haven't taken one. We take those decisions month by month. And surely, if we've learnt anything from the past three to four years, it's that so many unexpected things can happen even in three months.So what our decision will be next month, let alone in May, we haven't decided. We'll come back and look at the facts. That's the way we set policy.So I think some people are running ahead of themselves in saying that we are pre-announcing or we're, you know, laying the ground for a rate rise. That decision has not been taken, and it won't be taken until we get to the next meeting or the following
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011meeting or that. And it may be many quarters before we do anything. It will depend upon the facts - how the economy has evolved since our last assessment last week, when we didn't change Bank Rate, and we will see what happens as we go forward.A small follow-up. Looking at the charts, both on unchanged rates and on the market path, the inflation profile isn't hugely different - I mean, there is a difference of balance of risks. I mean, is it roughly the case that you would use - the Bank's models would suggest that every 1% Bank Rate is higher, inflation at the two-year horizon would be around about 0.3 percentage points lower. Is that the kind of magnitudes?Well, I think the - I mean, don't use the word model. This is a judgement of the Committee, and we don't - models can be helpful in ensuring that things add up, but they're not things that you use to determine your judgement about the outlook. At present, the link between Bank Rate and its impact on spending output and inflation is probably more muted than would be the case in normal times, because of the difficulties in the banking sector and the difficult judgement about how any change in Bank Rate would pass through to effective lending and borrowing rates.And one of the reasons why the market yield curve itself has actually come down significantly over the past two years is because the expectation, which both the market and ourselves held two years ago, which was that the wedge between Bank Rate and the rates which banks were able to obtain funding at, and hence were able to lend at, would gradually start to recover once the immediate crisis was over.That hasn't really happened. There have certainly been encouraging developments in the funding of banks, in that the
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King: Chris Giles, Financial Times:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011funding raised last year did not require the government to guarantee the credit which banks were raising. But nevertheless banks are still having to pay up to obtain funding, and inevitably that is affecting the interest rates at which they can afford to lend. So the wedge between Bank Rate and borrowing rates in the economy has not come down as we had expected two years ago.Now at some point it will come down, but that has been much more sluggish, and perhaps, you know, a study of these financial crises in the past would have led one to expect that it will take a considerable period. We will see. This is very much an issue about the structure of UK banking and the confidence that suppliers of funds have in it.But that is one factor which has clearly changed the market's perception, relative to two years ago, about the speed with which interest rates would need to rise.Governor, first of all can I welcome Charts 5.6 and 5.8 in the Report because there's a welcome increase in transparency from the Bank.Thank you.Can you just go further on the transparency front, and talk about the inflation and growth forecasts in the medium term a bit more? Because the inflation forecast is higher across the distribution; the growth forecast is lower across the distribution, despite a higher conditioning path for interest rates. Can you explain whether this is because you think supply capacity's persistently weaker, whether the nominal anchor has slipped, or whether the monetary policy is impotent in being able to boost demand in the economy?
Mervyn King:Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011And just more generally, can you tell us what the Bank of England has learnt from the persistent inflation forecasting errors of the past five years.Well, let me make two comments, and then ask Charlie to take you through the picture for the profiles for inflation and growth.What we have learnt about the outturns for inflation is that they can be explained by unexpected increases in energy prices, commodity prices - including food prices. And for example, the very significant difference between the outturn in the first quarter of this year and the figure that we had expected in our central view 12 months ago can virtually all be explained in terms of those factors.So we have seen a sequence of those shocks. We used the futures path for those prices as our central view about where the prices of those commodities and energy will go in the future. That seems a reasonable judgement to incorporate in our central view. The outturns have been very different from the values implied by those futures paths, and explain the deviations of the outturn from our previous central view.The pattern in our charts today is clearly affected by the news about inflation in the short run that we've seen over the past three months, and by the data that we've received for growth which was weaker in the fourth quarter than was expected, even adjusting for the effects of snow. And we expect that some of that weakness will persist.But perhaps Charlie can give you a proper tour of the charts, going all the way through from now to the forecast horizon.
Charlie Bean:Tadgh Enright, Sky News:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011Okay, well the big picture is pretty much the same as it was a quarter ago, namely the near term elevation reflecting the various shocks to energy prices, VAT and so forth. Then as those effects wane, inflation dropping back and a persistent pull-down on inflation from the margin of spare capacity.Now as you correctly observed, thinking about the comparison with last time, the output inflation trade-off is somewhat less favourable. And there's a number of judgements that have gone into that. In part it's a modest downward evaluation in our assessment of the margin of spare capacity that there is. That's partly informed by work that we've been doing looking at the evolution of productivity and sectoral developments, and so forth.Also we've assumed that there'll be some carry-through into the second year of the projection from the current elevated level of inflation - so a modest second round effect, if you like, through inflation expectations; and to a degree that employees will seek to recoup some of the hit to real wages that they've been suffering over the past year or so, because of the high rate of inflation - what the Governor referred to as real wage resistance.So there's an element of all of those things in there which conspire to make the combination of output and inflation, that we see in the second year of the projection and into the first part of the third year, somewhat less favourable than we judged in the previous Report.You're painting a worst case scenario of 6% consumer price inflation in the near term, this because of a worsening of those foreign factors that have been blamed over the last few quarters. You say that domestically generated inflation remains below the target. Is there a danger though that, if there is to be an interest rate rise in line with the market's expectations, that you risk
Mervyn King:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011triggering a period of domestically generated deflation? And what are your concerns about the consequences of that?Well, there are risks on both sides. We don't have a worst case scenario; we've not put a number on any such worst case scenario. There are simply risks on the upside and to the downside. Overall we think those risk are broadly balanced. But there clearly are risks to the downside, and those risks will come from, you know, weaker growth, persistent spare capacity, resulting in domestically generated inflation. It wouldn't even have to fall below where it is now. It would merely have to stay where it is now to mean that inflation would fall well below the target. That is clearly a downside risk, and we're very conscious of it.Equally there are upside risks, either because some of the short-term influences of what's happening in the rest of the world carry through for a year or two; or that inflation expectations pick up because of the experience of higher inflation than target; or that there is an attempt to restore real wages, which - although it would be unsuccessful in the medium term - nevertheless may lead firms and those bargaining for higher wages to push nominal wages up in what would ultimately be an unsuccessful attempt to restore real wages. Those things are the upside risks. We describe in great detail in the Report - these are our difficult judgements.And I think, you know, what I would hope that you would all take away from this press conference is the fact that what really matters for monetary policy now is not the current inflation rate, or trying to do anything about that - one can't; it's looking ahead and asking the question - what does all this mean for the outlook in the medium term?
Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011The experience of high inflation now does create upside risks for inflation in the medium term if people try to push up money wages and prices because they expect higher inflation to persist. Equally the degree of spare capacity, reinforced by this morning's labour market data and the fact that average earnings are rising at well below rates consistent with the target in the long run, mean downside risks to inflation.It is very, very difficult to balance those risks. That's our job. We're doing it. We think they're equally balanced at present; that's why we didn't raise Bank Rate. And we will have to continue to make those judgements.But I think what's very important is for people to understand that, you know, this argument has tended to become rather polarised, in which everyone's got a very strong view as to what should happen to interest rates; it's just that no one agrees on what that is. And on the one hand, you know, one camp that says - even a small rise in Bank Rate, no matter how small, will plunge us back into recession and mean the recovery - hopes of recovery are dashed forever; I don't really understand the logic behind that. On the other hand, there are those who say actually a small rise in Bank Rate won't have any impact on growth; but you're credibility will disappear unless you put up Bank Rate. If a small rise in Bank Rate doesn't affect growth, it won't influence inflation - I don't really understand how that will work either.That school of thought to me runs the risk of - it reminds me of a sketch in Beyond the Fringe, where the senior military leader says - it's time for futile gesture; it will raise the whole tone of the war. Well, we're not in the business of futile gestures; we're in the business of trying to make a dispassionate analysis of the balance of risks to inflation in the medium term. And that's what we're trying to do, and that's what this Report sets out.
Sam Fleming, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011So what I hope you'll take away is that it isn't a question of these two polarised positions; it is a question - a difficult judgement on which reasonable people can reach different answers - about how to balance the risks looking further ahead. And that's what the process of monetary policy is all about.Governor, does the Bank accept, however, following on from what you just said, that there is a risk now that the repeated overshoots and forecasting errors begin to undermine the credibility of the 2% target? Effectively, why should the general public now believe that the Bank is committed to that 2% target, given their experience of inflation over the recent period? And are there any steps the Bank can take now in order to reassure the public that that commitment is as iron clad as it was before?Well, I can assure you the commitment is iron clad. The method we use to make that credible is not just to assert it, not to make futile gestures, but to put forward a reasoned explanation of why we think inflation has risen; to point out that the domestic contribution to inflation is low, below that of the inflation target; and to point out that - although that may pick up - nevertheless, our judgement is that, in the absence of further unexpected shocks, we think the risks to the inflation target looking ahead are broadly balanced.But we don't pretend to have a crystal ball to foresee the future. Anyone who does that I think is being very foolish. We don't have that crystal ball. What we do have is an ability, I think, to form judgements about that balance of risks.But what we've seen in the last three or four years is that we've been going through a period when the size of the shocks can be very, very large. We've seen extraordinary events - the biggest
Sean O'Grady, The Independent:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011shock to the banking sector this country has ever seen; the largest downturn in output since the 1930s. We didn't see a sharp rise in unemployment; we have seen low nominal wage growth; we have seen very large contributions to inflation from energy and commodity prices from the rest of the world.All of these shocks are things that we have to cope with, and we will endeavour to navigate our way through what is undoubtedly a very choppy period, to get back to a position where growth is close to its long run potential average, and inflation is close to the target. And the test is not pretending that you'll never be blown off-course because they're won't be any winds in the future; there always will be. The test is to make sure that we have the ability to respond to that, and always to take actions to make sure that we are still headed towards our ultimate goal, which is to get inflation back to the target.And our credibility will depend in the long run on the outcomes, and at present I hope in terms of whether our explanations make sense to reasonable people looking at the same factors in the world economy.What do you say, Governor, to the criticism that your ability to raise rates to combat inflation is being constrained by what's happening on the fiscal side - that spending cuts and tax hikes, now and coming down the line, will leave the economy so weak, that even if you wanted to, you could raise rates in order to combat inflation?Well, I think that puts the question the wrong way round, if I may say so. It's not that we sit here saying - gosh, we'd like to raise interest rates to restrain inflation, but we think demand's too weak to support that. The reason you'd want to change interest rates is
Sean O'Grady, The Independent: Mervyn King:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011because you felt that demand was strong enough to mean that the outlook for inflation meant that it was sensible to adjust policy.There is no one factor. Clearly, the fiscal consolidation is going to slow demand relative to where it would have been without the fiscal consolidation, and that's always been in our judgement - there's nothing new there.So that factor enters into our overall judgment. But what will determine the decision on Bank Rate is a judgement on the overall balance of risks to the inflation outlook in which many factors will enter into it - not just the fiscal consolidation, but private spending - what's going to happen to private consumption? What's happening to exports, to investment? What does any of this mean to domestic pressures on inflation in the future? What will happen to inflation expectations? All of these factors have to be factored in to an overall judgement, not just one.So you're not, in some sense, George Osborne's Plan B?Well, I've only ever said one thing about this, and I'm not going to comment any more on fiscal policy. There has to be a Plan A. Now you can clearly debate, you know, the timing and everything else; but that this country needs a fiscal consolidation starting from its largest peacetime budget deficit ever seems to be common to everyone. And that that will need a rebalancing of the economy, supported by a fall in the real exchange rate also seems to me common to everyone. And these are the two big factors driving the economic outlook. I think we should be glad that we're in a position where both these factors are going to operate over the next five years.There are of course very difficult judgements about timing, and monetary policy is firmly focused on the difficult question of the
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King: Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011timing of adjustments to Bank Rate. It is clear that at some point Bank Rate will have to go up. Anyone making long-term financial decisions should not expect Bank Rate to be at these low levels indefinitely. But the judgement about the timing and the speed at which Bank Rate will rise is a difficult one; it's not at all obvious; and we're certainly not going to pre-announce any judgements or decisions on that today. We'll take those judgements, month by month, in the light of the data as they come along.As I said before, the one thing that surely everyone has learnt is that almost every month, but certainly every quarter, quite big news has arisen - unpredictable news. And that has to be taken into account. I'm sure you wouldn't want it any other way.If I was here three months from now, trying to explain that we'd changed interest rates because we'd decided to do it in February, and despite the fact the data had moved all over the place, we felt we had to go ahead with it, you would laugh at us - rightly so. We have to look at the data as they are at the time we make the decision. And we'll take whatever decision is appropriate at the time.Governor, I mean, despite your constant claim that the answers are not obvious, I mean - and it doesn't matter what the current rate of inflation is, it matters to people who are seeing their wages disappear into their local supermarket ...Absolutely.... at an increasingly rapid rate. Now somebody took the decisions that have led to this situation where the outcome is double the target. If that was any other part of life, in business or the economy there would be a big question asked about who took the decisions and what those decisions were. And I think people
Mervyn King:Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight: Laughter Mervyn King:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011will understand that it's tough doing this job, there are surprises everywhere. But who was it who revelled in the fall of sterling? Who was it who printed £200 billion worth of quantitative easing? Who was it who took interest rates to zero bound? I mean, it was this Committee, and therefore you can't sit there and say - oh we've missed the target by a factor of 100%, but there's nothing we can do about it. People want answers to that.What would you have done, Paul? I seem to remember that you were very ...... Put me on the committee and find out.All of us, I'm sure, have enjoyed listening to you over the last two or three years about policy. Not once, not once, Paul, have you argued strongly that there should have been a significant tightening of monetary policy and that the economy needed to have a much deeper recession. My point to you is simply this - would you have had us deliberately raise interest rates by a significant amount in order to induce a much deeper recession; raise unemployment in order to push money wages down in the way that it has happened in Ireland and Greece and Portugal, in order to meet the inflation target in the short run; running a serious risk - which you would have been the first to point out to us, if we'd been here today in that position - you would have been saying, Paul, the first thing is - gosh look what you've done; maybe you've hit the inflation target in February 2011, but given the short run cost shocks that the UK economy has faced, you surely must be expecting a substantial undershoot in 2012 and 2013? And you would have been right. That is the explanation of what we did.
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011You're right there, Governor, but there is one problem. And that is that if we take that as a rational discourse, maybe there was nothing that could have been done without crashing the economy, that the target is a fiction, that's the problem - that the target, just to ordinary people is not anchored in reality. And so if everything you did was necessary and it has doubled inflation above the target, then we're just - surely you're the experts not the bloke on the street, you're the ones in the position to say to the Chancellor - this target is just a fiction.No, I don't think it's a fiction. And it's not, because the remit makes it very clear that where there are the sorts of shocks that we have experienced in the last couple of years, that it's sensible not to bring inflation back to the target quickly, but to do it over a longer period; and that's what we're doing. But it is vital to have a target to which we would intend to bring back inflation, absent further unexpected shocks.Where I do have enormous sympathy for people is that the vast majority of people in this country were in no way responsible for the events of the financial crisis and the downturn in output, and yet they are now suffering a squeeze on real living standards for which the current rate of inflation is the obvious symptom. But that squeeze on real living standards is going to happen one way or another; it is the price we are all paying for the financial crisis and the subsequent need to rebalance our economy. And the only question is - is it better to allow it to happen with a temporary rise in prices, or to push down money wages even further - maybe falls in money wages? I think the right answer to that was that we should not have engineered an even deeper recession, and I think most people would have severely criticised us if we had done that.
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011But I do understand the enormous concern that people have. I would point out that this concern is a concern about real living standards which are being squeezed; I have sympathy for that. But I'm afraid I do not see any way out of that; it's the consequence of the financial crisis and the need to rebalance our economy. We will bring inflation back to the target, we will do so over a time frame that prevents us turning the economy into an even deeper recession than the one we've already had.If you do find yourself tightening policy in the months ahead, is there any kind of a case for doing it by unwinding QE, rather than through interest rates? And if I can just quickly ask the same question which has been asked repeatedly here today - obviously it's quite unlikely that these extreme rises in food and energy prices that we've seen over the last three months will be repeated; nevertheless we do seem to have moved from a period where most of the external pressures of inflation are disinflationary to one in which they're inflationary, and most people would accept that this likely to persist.What are the implications of that for monetary policy, do you accept a permanently higher rate of inflation, or does there come a point where you have to press down on domestic demand to compensate?We certainly don't accept a permanently higher rate of inflation. We are going through a rebalancing such that we can get back to a point - and domestic demand in the short run will need to grow more slowly than would otherwise have been the case. And this is the reverse of the position we were in before the crisis. But we certainly intend to bring inflation back to the target.I think it's important to distinguish between the impact of the commodity and energy price increases where, as you say, market
Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011expectations, futures prices, don't suggest that a reasonable view is that they'll continue to rise at this rate, though none of us know what actually will happen. That means that those inflationary pressures will abate. There may be some impact of higher inflationary pressures in emerging markets that will feed through in the short run, and we'll try and take that into account.But remember that two thirds of our trade is with part of the world in the European Union and the United States where inflation, in any underlying sense, is very low. And indeed at the Federal Reserve they've been talking about underlying inflation if anything falling rather than rising, and certainly below anything that you could describe as their target. In the rest of the world there are some pressures.But in the very long run inflation is not determined outside these shores; it's determined in the UK, and it'll be our stance in monetary policy. The level of interest rates that we will need to set will depend on the equilibrium, real rate of interest and our inflation target; those things can move. We have been through a period in which world real interest rates in the long term have been exceptionally low; it is conceivable that we'll move at some point to a world where they'll return to a more normal level. And at that point interest rates would normally be, clearly higher.But I think that's down the road; it's not the immediate policy question, but it's something we're conscious of in the back of our minds. But it certainly is not the immediate issue here; the immediate question is judging this balance in the medium term between upside and downside risk to inflation.
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph: Mervyn King:Philip Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011And the question on QE?Oh sorry, the question on QE. The Committee decided some while ago - and I think we've made it clear in various speeches - that the presumption, the clear presumption of the Committee is that the first move to tighten policy, when it comes, will be a move in Bank Rate. And the reason for that is that we wouldn't want to unwind the - well the asset purchases, we wouldn't want to sell those assets, until we were fairly confident that we were entering a period of several months when we were content gradually to sell those - some of the assets over a six month period. I think when it comes to selling the assets, we won't do so by selling a certain amount in one month and then do nothing for several months, and then do another bit. We'll have a programme of asset sales, pre-announced, which is likely to last somewhere between three and six months. And therefore we wouldn't want to do that as the first tightening move.Of course the Committee, when it comes to the event, may decide otherwise, but our clear presumption that we've discussed and agreed is that we'd always start with a move in Bank Rate.I just wanted to ask about how confident you are that the rebalancing will be achieved, because if we look at the export data recently, France and Germany and others who haven't had the devaluation have - their exports have been growing at equal or a better rate than the UK. At the same time our imports are rising faster than our exports; we seem to be importing inflation. And just secondly, on the output gap, I just wondered if you could give us a little more detail on how your position has changed on that over the past several months?Well on the second, maybe I'll ask Spencer to comment on that. On the first, I think it would be very peculiar if a 20% fall in the real
Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011exchange rate did not lead to some rebalancing. There are very few examples where if you have a persistent fall in the real exchange rate you don't see a rebalancing. You clearly see it in the figures for exports. I think there is certainly evidence that some forms of import expenditure switching is occurring. If you look, for example, at foreign tourism, the number of UK visitors taking holidays abroad has fallen by over 20%, the number of foreigners taking holidays in the UK has also fallen, but by only half that. So there is a clear sign of some expenditure switching.There is a chart in the Report - I think it's 2.14 on page 24, which shows imports and UK import-weighted demand, that is the components of demand weighted by their import intensity. And I think you can see that what we saw last year was a very sharp bounce-back in import-weighted demand because the bounce-back in demand was focused on stock building and investment, both of which are highly import intensive. So it's not very surprising that you would see a strong rebound in imports in that period.Now the data I don't think on trade can really be thought reliable for at least a year. And I think it will be some time before we will see this picture being very clear. It may even be three or four years before the final national accounts show us this. But I must say I find it very hard - I mean we go around the country all the time talking to businesses. Manufacturing businesses are much more optimistic than those focused on selling to domestic customers and they will cite the fall in the exchange rate as being one of the factors that makes it possible for them to see higher demand and to meet that demand.So I cannot believe that this fall in the real exchange rate won't lead to some rebalancing. The degree - that of course is a judgement and it's difficult. But I think we will see a rebalancing.
Spencer Dale:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011The output gap, Spencer?So we still think there is a substantial degree of spare capacity within the economy. Within the labour market I think that's quite evident. Unemployment has increased by around a million, and almost any indicator you look at suggests there is slack within the labour market. In terms of the degree of spare capacity within companies, I think that's a harder judgement to make and there's mixed evidence. And for those of you who have time I commend to you the discussion in Section 3 of the Report where we go through these different indicators at some length.On the one hand, if you look at the levels of productivity that we see in companies now, and compare those to the levels of productivity you would have expected to have seen now if they'd continued to grow at the same pace as we've seen in the past - the levels of productivity now look quite weak relative to that benchmark, and that suggests there's lots of spare capacity within companies.But if you look at other indicators, that suggests that there's less so, particularly if you look at business surveys of spare capacity in both manufacturing and services there doesn't seem to be an awful lot of spare capacity. And also we've seen firms increase investment this year and increase employment over the last year. And that's a hard thing to square with companies having lots of spare capacity.The Committee place some weight on both of those lots of evidence. And as the Governor suggested, our view is if you think about that shortfall of the level of productivity, relative to this sort of pre-crisis trend, we think around half of that shortfall is
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News: Mervyn King: Laughter Mervyn King:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011likely to persist, but around half of it is likely to be made up and caught up as the economy recovers.Your own remit, this is a quote from your remit that you quoted in your speech - "The actual inflation rate will on occasions depart from its target as a result of shocks and disturbances." We're surely well beyond on occasions now and the table in here says that inflation expectations are between 3.2% and 4%. It is not time to sort of admit that your Committee can't control inflation because of the international impacts, and for public policy to come up with a different target?We have never pretended that we can avoid short-term fluctuations in inflation. In a famous ...... It's beyond the short term now. Well, you're very young Faisal ...This has been going on for much longer than we would have expected or hoped, but it's been going on for reasons we can see. The rise in energy and commodity prices has been continuing for longer than we thought, longer than the market expected; the futures curves did not anticipate this. But we have to respond to the world as we see it, to the factors that are thrown at us.I think what is very important for people to understand is that after the period of the NICE Decade, when the fluctuations in short term inflation were very small, we got used to a period in which, you know, people thought inflation was highly predictable in the short run. That isn't the case. We've now been going through a period - which I hope and believe, as we look back from the
Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011perspective of some years ahead - will also seem rather exceptional in the opposite direction; namely very volatile short run movements in inflation. What we're going through now is much closer to what people used to see in the 19th century when the price level, or the inflation rate, would move around very markedly from year to year. Nevertheless the underlying price level was very stable.What monetary policy can try to do is to ensure that on average, over a long period inflation is close to the target. There is therefore some anchor for long-term expectations about the price level. But we can't prevent these short-term shocks to inflation coming through, unless we were to engage in an extraordinarily volatile and self-defeating chasing of moving interest rates up drastically and then cutting them even more drastically, in order to create booms and recessions to offset short run movements in commodity and energy prices. And surely that would not in any way be sensible?We will just continue to explain what we think the developments have been. Our credibility others can judge; we can't judge our own credibility. But we will continue to explain what we've done and why, why we think inflation has moved, and why in our view a reasonable person who might be sitting on our Committee would take the view that if they looked at all the data they would form a judgement that looking ahead two to three years, the balance of risk to inflation was actually broadly balanced, and therefore where we are is a fairly sensible position.Now of course there's room for disagreement about that - plenty of room for disagreement about small changes on either side of that. But the big picture - the big picture does seem to me - we've set out here - every member of the Committee thinks the big picture is very clear: the broad shape, inflation high in the short
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011run, coming back towards target; that's the big picture. Of course you can have different views about the precise speed at which it's going to come back, faster or more slowly than in the central path. That's the difficult judgements to be made about monetary policy. But the big picture seems to me robust.Is one reason constraining you, that if you were to put up Bank Rate it would then be difficult to increase QE, or do you see that those two ...?No, absolutely nothing is constraining us. There is nothing constraining us. We will make our choice, month by month, according to how we see this balance of risks. I think that's a sensible way to proceed. Now of course you're perfectly entitled to say we've made poor judgement; it's perfectly reasonable to argue that. But we have to make that judgement. All I want to do is to impress upon you that the judgement we're making is not some knee jerk reaction to what's happening now; it's a considered judgement about the balance of risk to inflation in that medium term.We do face a difficult time ahead; there is no doubt about that, and the concerns that most people have that Paul described so vividly are genuine and real and I have great sympathy for them. We are seeing a significant squeeze on real living standards, and we do face a difficult period ahead. The judgement for the Monetary Policy Committee is what action we need to take once these price level shocks fall out to bring inflation back to the target, and that's what we're doing.Governor, in your opening remarks you mentioned that there will probably be ups and downs in, quarter on quarter GDP growth rates. Given that the bulk of the spending cuts are yet to come, do you think that there is a chance that we may see another
Mervyn King:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011negative quarter of growth? And a second question, if I may? With inflation likely to stay elevated for a few months, do you think the differences on the Monetary Policy Committee may deepen further?There are always chances of ups and downs in growth rates. No one can possibly deny that. And that's always been the case; it's not just true now - it's been the case before.In terms of differences of view on the Committee, I mean to be honest, I think given the extraordinary circumstances that we're facing: the biggest banking crisis in this country in our history, still difficult and adjusting to that; clear problems in lending to industry. Given that we've seen these very large rises in commodity and energy prices, the real consequences of this crisis and the need to rebalance our economy are only now being felt. They weren't felt in 2008; they are now beginning to be felt. And this will come through over a considerable period. That's why we face a difficult time ahead.But given these extraordinary events that have hit our economy, if I were to come to you today and say - no, nine people on the committee; we all think exactly the same - you would say - oh come off it. With these enormous challenges which few of us have experienced in our lifetime; with these big and difficult judgements about whether inflation expectations might pick up, about what will happen to the future path of inflation; how much spare capacity is there - surely this is the sort of time when you'd expect to see differences of view and judgement on the Committee and that's precisely why the structure of the Committee was set up the way it was. Nine people, each of them appointed to make their own independent judgement about this difficult outlook, balancing risks.
Ramya Jaidev, Central Banking Publications:Mervyn King: Charlie Bean:David Milliken, Reuters:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011And there are bound to be differences of view, if you don't get differences of view in this kind of situation whenever would you find them?Could you just explain a little about how you monitor the feed-through from expectations to wages and then prices?Why don't we ask Charlie to comment on that?When you say - how do you monitor - I mean, we obviously look at pay growth and indicators of prospective pay growth. So for us information that we get through our agents at this time of year for instance is particularly important; we get them regularly to conduct a survey at the beginning of the year of their contacts on likely pay settlements, with the peak months in pay obviously being in January and April.So they're the natural things that we look at. In terms of leading indicators, obviously measures of slack in the labour market, unemployment vacancies, things like that, are going to be important. And clearly the evolution of productivity is central because that determines how much scope there is for firms to pay higher wages without it feeding into their costs.Governor, I'd like to return to the question of the market interest rate expectations, and I sort of fully appreciate as you've said that it makes no sense for a central bank to pre-commit to raising interest rates sort of nine months or a year in advance. But equally it's sort of possible, I would have thought, to give some kind of guidance about the direction of travel, and markets are sort of pricing in an increase in May, which is three months away. Obviously sort of the sky can fall in over that period, but I was really wondering whether you could give some guidance as to
Mervyn King:Page 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011whether that's a reasonable view, what's currently priced into markets or sort of ...?... No I'm not going to say where interest rates will go, we don't play this game of sort of making a decision in private and then sort of hinting where rates will go, and then the market adapting. And then you say - gosh, we validated it. That's not the game that we play.Of course it's important for markets to understand what might happen to rates, but that is a judgement which they're well equipped themselves to make, given their analysis of the economy and what they see, and given that they know what our analysis is.The path that we've always followed is that we set out very clearly our own judgements about the consequences of following particular paths for Bank Rate. And we set out two particular paths; people can interpolate, extrapolate, make whatever judgements they like. We believe the right thing to do is not to try and hint or pretend that we have decided where rates will go; we clearly haven't. And I think it's very important to understand that whatever looks a reasonable path today may turn out to be very unreasonable in a few months time.So what we set out in this Report is our judgement about the balance of risks to inflation and then the market itself can infer from this what it wishes about the upside and downside risks to the path of Bank Rate relative to its belief about what will happen. That's the role of the market to make those judgements, not ours. But our role is indeed to provide as much information as we can about our analysis of the economy and as Spencer says, there are a lot of details in this Report about our judgement about spare capacity, and our judgement about the underlying forces shaping
Jenny Scott: Alen Mattich, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Alen Mattich, Dow Jones:Page 30 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011inflation. It's that we'd ask people to look at, not some single sentence which enables - you know, people are paid enough in markets to ask them reasonably to read 50 pages. And I'd ask them to do that, reflect on it, before coming to a judgement about what will happen, but always to recognise that what will happen will depend in part on the judgements that are spelled out here, but also on the news that will arrive undoubtedly over the next few months, which none of us - none of us - can predict.Time for just two more, here and then Philip.If you overlay the Fan Charts, it looks an awful lot like you're targeting 5% to 6% nominal GDP. Might that explain why you've taken an asymmetric approach to inflation? And a second question if you'll indulge me? What do you think the NAIRU unemployment rate is?Well we don't target nominal GDP, we target inflation; nor do we take an asymmetric approach. We always try to bring inflation back to the target with balanced risks around that. Events will determine the sequence of periods over which inflation is above or below. I remember very clearly a period, not so long ago, when many members of the Monetary Policy Committee were saying - how on earth are we going to get inflation up to the target? You know, are we taking an asymmetric view on the downside? There are periods that you go through when inflation is either above or below; it doesn't just bobble around above one month and below the next. There are sustained periods when it's on one side or the other. But we have a clearly symmetric approach.There's a lot more asymmetry on one side than there was on the other.
Mervyn King:Alen Mattich, Mervyn King: Alen Mattich, Mervyn King:Alen Mattich, Mervyn King:Dow Jones:Dow Jones:Dow Jones:Page 31 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011Well it depends on the length of the period you look at. There have been a sequence of price shocks, which I've explained, and I would just put the question to you again - do you think policy should have been different in the last three years?I do, yeah.Okay and you would have had much higher interest rates?No, not much, but probably not too ...You think that would have made a real difference to the extent of the overshoot of inflation above target?Possibly.These are - I mean, what we can all agree on I think is that there is no black and white here; there are difficult judgements and anyone who's absolutely certain that a certain course of action is right or wrong is exaggerating the degree of certainty about the future.Final question.Hello, Governor. I just wanted to ask a slightly more micro question which was whether you get a sense that inflation is uniform across the country or whether you see a two-speed inflation with London and the South East having higher and lower elsewhere?I think that the pattern of recovery is clearly shifting towards activity in those parts of the economy which have a somewhat higher proportion of manufacturing output, and that is helping some of the regions away from London, and that's a beneficialJenny Scott: Phillip Inman, The Guardian:Mervyn King:
ENDPage 32 Quarterly Inflation Report - 16th February 2011outcome of this rebalancing. I don't think in terms of consumer price inflation there is an obvious difference. There is clearly a difference to the extent that the particularly commodities where prices have risen most rapidly, namely food and energy, impact on lower income households, that is a group that is experiencing even greater hardship than is being experienced by the population as a whole. But I don't think that's something which is particularly regional; it's wherever you find people who are particularly dependent on energy and food as a large proportion of their budget. And I do think it reinforces the point I made earlier. I have enormous sympathy, and I understand the anger of those people who are worried about inflation because it represents a squeeze on their living standards. And all I would try to point out, difficult though it is to explain, that actually lowering inflation as such is not going to prevent the squeeze on living standards, because all it will do is to squeeze real wages in order to bring inflation down. That's how our monetary policy works. And we need to get through these temporary price shocks and back to a point where we can ensure a recovery of output, employment and living standards and get inflation back to around the target.That is the message that we think we can achieve unless we see further unexpected shocks. They may happen. They could happen in the opposite direction, which would make life easier for us. We don't know. But as of now, the Committee has taken a judgement that the balance suggests that where we are now is the right place.