Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 10th August 2011
Sean O’Grady:Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Governor, you said some months ago that the nation faced the longest squeeze in living standards since the 1920s. In the face of your reduced growth estimates, can you sat a bit more about how deep that squeeze might be over the next year or so, and also what you think may happen to unemployment?I see no reason to change the judgement that I made when I gave that speech in January. This is a long and deep squeeze in real living standards, coming from developments such as the need to adjust and rebalance our own economy and changes in what is happening outside the UK in commodity and oil prices.The good news of the last few days is that there have for the first time been signs - first time for some while - been signs of a fall back in oil and other commodity prices. And that I think will bring forward the day when the squeeze on real living standards will come to an end.Really to follow on on the question of living standards, you have said that we're in the process of undergoing this squeeze on living standards. And in one of the charts in the Report here you look at the consequences - what are the factors - let me just find it - in Chart 2.2 you look at the factors that are contributing to this squeeze on real incomes. And by far and away the biggest squeeze is coming from prices. And so people might look at this, and they might look at their experience where they're feeling prices are going up and they're being squeezed by that, and I think legitimately ask the question - isn't the Bank to some extent responsible for this squeeze on people's incomes by not keeping the inflation level at the 2% target? And how would you respond to that?Well, I respond in the exactly the same way as I did in that speech in January, which is to point out that the prices here which are
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011responsible for the squeeze on living standards are not domestically generated inflation, which is the inflation that the Bank of England can control. It is the increase in energy and commodity prices coming from overseas, and the increase in prices as a result of the fall in the exchange rate, which is an absolutely vital part, and necessary condition, for the rebalancing of our own economy.We could, I suppose, have had a much tighter monetary policy, to have raised interest rates significantly over the past two years. That might have meant that headline inflation was indeed closer to the target, but it would have been as a result of falls in money ways, higher unemployment, and undoubtedly a steep downturn in activity. And I don't think that that is either consistent with our remit, nor would it be remotely sensible.So what we've done - if you look at another chart in here which is showing the decomposition of the contributions to inflation - the various factors - is that value added tax increase, which is part of the rebalancing to put our fiscal position back in order, and the increase in import prices which are responsible for the higher inflation rate that we see.Now what this Report does today is to point out that we may see another move upwards in the next few months as a result of gas and electricity prices, but once that's happened - from then on - inflation will start to come back. And it should fall quite sharply during next year, and there should be no further squeeze on living standards unless we see further rises in import or oil and commodity prices. I think, given where we are today, that seems less likely than it did even one month ago.In the Inflation Report of August 2008, the last one before Lehman Brothers collapsed, the Bank then forecast that output
Mervyn King:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011would be flat over the next 12 months. In the event it fell by something like 5%, the biggest fall in any one year since the 1920s. Given that background, what are the chances do you think that you're being still over-optimistic about the likely path of GDP, and what chances would you say of Britain having a double dip recession over the next year?Well what we try to do each time is to assess the balance of risks. And when there are very large and unexpected events, such as the extraordinary fall in confidence around the world that resulted - it wasn't the collapse of Lehman Brothers as such that caused the problem, it was that this triggered an extraordinary collapse of confidence, not just in the industrialised world but right around the world economy, which unprecedented policy responses brought to an end six months later.We've never claimed that we can predict precisely. We don't. What we're trying to do is to assess the balance of risks, and we look at all the information we can to do that. I think that we feel that the Report that we agreed last week is indeed a reflection of the balance of risks. But there are many things that could happen and could go wrong, as we've seen in the last week or even in the last 24 hours. Anyone who claims to be able to predict precisely surely can't possibly believe that after the events of the last week. We don't. What we're trying to do is to say that because monetary policy has its impact only with a lag, we have no alternative but to look forward and form a judgement about that balance of risks. And that's what we're doing.I just wondered if you were concerned about the dangers of the extension of the very low interest rates for much longer? I mean, obviously there are pressures to keeping interests low, but households are getting increasingly hooked on cheap credit, which makes it more difficult in the long term to change the
Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011course of interest rates without inflicting the sort of pain that you're trying to avoid at the moment. I think 70% of households are on variable LTVs, for example.But I think that there's been a big sea change, and we've seen a very sharp fall in the growth rate of unsecured credit, which undoubtedly would be a cause for concern; but that has been very weak recently. It's picked up very slightly, but it's still pretty weak. And for secured credit, all I can say is that the level of transactions in the housing market, which corresponds to secured household credit, is about 50% of the normal level. So if anything, the growth of money and credit in our economy are at extraordinarily low levels rather than disturbingly high levels.But there's no doubt that people taking out contracts need to be conscious of the fact that at some point interest rates will need to return to normal. As I've said on a number of occasions before, the sorts of circumstances in which we would be pushing up Bank Rate are likely to be exactly the same sort of circumstances in which the spreads which banks are charging above Bank Rate would themselves be coming down, and therefore the impact on borrowing rates would not be as large as you might imagine, given the increases we would be making in Bank Rate. That's a mirror image of what happened on the way down.But, you know, we will see what happens over the next two or three years. But there's no doubt that people taking out major financial contracts need to be conscious of their ability to handle a wide range of unexpected circumstances; changes in Bank Rate is only one of them, but their own circumstances, the ability to refinance borrowings that they've incurred - all these things are important. Clearly, when we come to set Bank Rate, we shall be doing it in the light of the outlook for inflation.
Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Mervyn King:Linda Yueh, Bloomberg TV:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Governor, in a recent report on the UK, the IMF said that the economy may require more stimulus, but it also said that tax cuts may be more effective than QE. Is that a view that you agree with?The IMF said that it may or it may not, and they certainly didn't recommend any immediate measures. So we'll see. What I would say is that our current plan, if you like, Plan A, has a great deal of flexibility built into it. If growth in the United Kingdom is weaker than corresponds to the central path assumed by the OBR, the Office of Budget Responsibility, when they make their independent checks on the fiscal position, then tax revenues will be lower and benefit payments will be higher, and the deficit will be higher as a result.No corresponding action need be taken to offset that; this is the so-called in the jargon - the automatic stabilisers - just allowing the cycle to affect the deficit, rather than using the deficit to affect the cycle. And that seems to me to build in a very significant degree of fiscal flexibility into Plan A.In addition, there is monetary policy; and I think that whether we want to tighten policy, or whether we want to loosen monetary policy further, we have tools available to do it. We can raise Bank Rate or we can increase our asset purchases according to the direction in which we want to go. And I see no impediment to doing either of those courses of action.I wanted to talk a little bit about the downside risks to growth that you highlighted. You pointed out the second half of the year growth may be better because of rebalancing and households improving their positions. I just wondered - say the trade position continues to deteriorate - there are some signs of that; exports have fallen, and the other growth drivers are weak after a
Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011financial crisis, is the Bank out of tools in its arsenal should these growth drivers – rebalancing, household spending - not recover in the second half of the year?No, we're not out of tools. If we need to, we can carry out more asset purchases. There is no difficulty or impediment to doing that, as I said. The Committee will have to decide if it wants to do that, and if so when. That's something not for today; that's for the next meeting and the meetings thereafter. Each time we make a new judgement. Last week we met and decided not to do that. But there's no technical reason why we cannot do that.As you said, the biggest risk on the downside to growth in the UK comes from the world economy, and hence to our net trade position - exports. The latest figures were weak on that, that is true. However, the volatility of the official trade figures is notorious, and I'd be very cautious to read too much into that.What we can see, however, is a distinct weakening around the world - not just in the industrialised world, but also in Asia - the slowing of the world economy, and that undoubtedly will make the export picture more difficult. So these are risks that we shall have to watch out for.But I want to reiterate a point I made in the opening statement, which is that there are limits to what monetary policy can do. There are significant real adjustments that have to be made in every major economy - not just the UK - every major economy, surplus or deficit in the run up to the crisis. We've all got to adjust the pattern of demand in our economies.The crucial thing is whether we can find a way to adjust the pattern of demand without seeing sharp downturns in output.
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011And that's going to require, I suspect, a good deal more co-operation than we've seen so far.Is there any merit, Governor, in the Bank of England following the US Federal Reserve into committing to two years of zero interest rate policy? Can that be done, given our elevated level of inflation here in the UK? And could you spell out quite what the triggers would be for a further bout of quantitative easing?Well, I'm surprised you use the word commitment because it's not the word that the FOMC themselves used. They said in current conditions - they could change - it is likely that - well, it may be likely that, but hardly a commitment in my sense. So I'd be a bit cautious about all of that.I see no reason for the MPC to do it. The current market expectation of where Bank Rate will be in 2013 is actually very close to where it is now, so market expectations have already got to that point without our needing to make any so-called commitment. And I think it's very dangerous to try and make a commitment because to lock in monetary policy now for two years does not seem to me particularly sensible. We've seen over the past month how much can change in one month or even a week. Who knows what conditions will be in a few months, let alone next year or in the middle of 2013?Monetary policy must have the discretion to move, and that's why I think, if you read carefully the FOMC's statement, they left themselves the freedom to adjust monetary policy over that two-year period if conditions change. And that's always been our position. The reason why we've always been deeply reluctant to make statements about where Bank Rate will go is precisely because people misinterpret that as a commitment to follow the path that we say is the most likely. And we can't do that.
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King: David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:David Smith, Sunday Times:Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Policy will always have to respond to changing circumstances. We've seen that right through this year. At the beginning of this year many people said - why don't we just say that we're going to raise Bank Rate along this path over the next year? And we couldn't, because we didn't know how events would unfold. And we were absolutely right, because we are not raising Bank Rate at present, So since circumstances can change very quickly, it is sensible not to pretend to be able to make a commitment, but to spell out how we think the economy is likely to evolve, so that markets themselves can make their own judgement.And just as in the case of the United States, markets here at present - as of this morning at least - attached the most likely outcome to Bank Rate being very close to where it is now in the middle of 2013.And the follow-up question which was more the trigger points for more QE?The outlook for inflation.Just to follow up on that, would more QE then require the majority of the Committee to be convinced that inflation was going to be below target in the medium term?Clearly it would require the majority of Committee to vote for QE, otherwise we wouldn't be doing it. And their decisions will be based on their judgement about the balance of risks to the outlook for inflation, yes.Can I just ask - are there circumstances in which other tools could be employed; for example, if there was a spill over from the European situation to the UK banking system? Could you
Mervyn King:Paul Fisher:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011envisage re-launching something like the Special Liquidity Scheme under any circumstances?Well, that would not be a question of monetary policy; that would be a question about financial stability. But I see no reason to think that we would either want or have to do that. That was a particular measure designed to deal with specific circumstances arising from freezing of markets in certain instruments in the summer of 2007. Since then we have reformed significantly the way in which we supply liquidity to the market, and a combination of our new long-term repos - perhaps Paul can say a word about this in a minute - our indexed long-term repos, which enables banks to bid for Central Bank money against either narrow - typically safe, collateral - or wider collateral with haircuts. And their bids in the auction, where they can bid against either form of collateral, give us a pretty good advance warning of stresses building up in the financial sector.So we have that as a very important tool that we can use at any point. And secondly, the discount window facility, which is a new facility, again to which banks can bring a wide range of collateral and, subject to often pretty high haircuts to account for the risk, we're prepared to give cash against that.But perhaps Paul could say a word about these two new facilities.The new long-term repos were introduced in the middle of last year give us this ability to take wider collateral automatically as part of the routine operations. And the way those are structured are unique in Central Bank operations; the bidders actually can bid against either set of collateral.And that's our market-wide facility, in which all the participants can bid once a month at least, as we are operating at the moment.
Hugh Pym, BBC News:Mervyn King:Alex Brittain, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011The discount window facility is our bilateral facility where an individual firm can come to us at any time and seek to get liquidity assistance against a much wider set of collateral even than the long-term repos. We didn't have either of those operations before the crisis started, but they're now part of the permanent framework.Governor, you've mentioned all these various risks, some of which you can't quantify. Given the turmoil in the eurozone, and market perceptions of a possible sharp slowdown in the US, what do you think British households should be expecting over the next year or so in terms of jobs and growth?Well, I said earlier, obviously a great deal of uncertainty, and no one should expect to know what the future holds. But what we've said in our Report today is that we do expect growth gradually to recover. It will be slow, but we expect a gradual recovery. The conditions for that are in place. And inflation, although it's likely to rise a little over the next few months with the increase in gas and electricity prices that have been announced, it will then start to come down during next year. And the squeeze on real household incomes that we've seen very sharp during this year and last will, I hope, come to an end next year, when we should start to see once again a resumption of normal increases in real incomes.Governor, I've got a question on inflation. Inflation has been pushed up in recent years by a series of one-off factors that the Committee has looked through. University tuition fees are going to triple in a lot of cases next year; and I'm wondering what impact do you think that will have on inflation, and will the Committee look through it?If it's regarded as a one-off increase, and it's a pre-announced one, but if we think this is likely to continue for some time, then we
Steve Hawkes, The Sun:Mervyn King:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011would say - no, we need to take into account in our decisions. But with all due respect, I don't think this is the most important factor confronting monetary policy at present, although it is undoubtedly the most important problem facing students in their daily lives.Mervyn, touching on the second part of Larry's question: do you feel, though, that we are back in a sense to in 2008 where people talk about LIBOR going up and bank funding costs going up, or has that been too alarmist? Are we all being a bit too gloomy here?I don't think you should compare this with 2008, and there are differences both on the optimistic and the gloomy side relative to 2008. 2008 was a banking crisis which eventually was tackled with the appropriate response which was to recapitalise the banking system. It took place perhaps somewhat later and over a somewhat longer period than it might have done. But it happened, and the banking system was recapitalised.I go back to what I said then, and I've said at all periods since then, which is that this crisis has never been one of liquidity. The liquidity problems have been severe, but they've been symptoms of a deeper insolvency problem. And the solvency issues are about the burden of debt and, until we face up to that, we will not see our way through it.What has happened since then of course is that the location of much of the debt has shifted from the banking sector to the public sector; the imbalances in the world economy have still not been properly tackled; and the burden of debt is still there. And so this problem is a problem that will take I think a number of years before we'll find our way through it. It is very important that we do not see the development of a sovereign debt crisis, because, as you've seen in the euro area, even in a tightly knit group of people
Alen Mattich, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011motivated by the desire to keep a monetary union going, it is very difficult to deal with transfers of debt from one group to another.So the problems of indebtedness are large; they're not easy to tackle, but we have to face up to it and find our way through it. And I think this is the challenge that we're seeing this year. 2008 was not the end of the crisis; it was merely one stage of it. So now we're going through another stage before I hope eventually we'll come to the end of it.Just following on from what you've just said. You said that costs have to be shared between creditors and debtors. Does this mean that the Bank of England within the UK will be pursuing an inflationary policy to transfer wealth from savers to borrowers, because that's part of one of these adjustments, isn’t it?No. And it's not the policy that we have followed or will follow. To do that, you would have to have high domestically generated inflation; we don't have high domestically generated inflation. In fact, our domestically generated inflation is below the level consistent with meeting the inflation target, so we hope it will actually come back over the next two years to a level consistent with the inflation target.What I mean by that is that, in normal circumstances, when you have these enormous imbalances between countries, where you need adjustments to be made, exchange rate movements are the natural mechanism by which adjustments can take place. And countries which have issued debt in their own currency can see a depreciation of their currency; and the real burden of that debt in terms of foreign currency goes down.One of the problems that caused the crisis was the move to a system of greater inflexibility in exchange rates, with no
Alex Brummer, Daily Mail:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011corresponding mechanism to ensure that the imbalances could be brought under control. And as a result, there are now enormous difficulties in seeing adjustments to the stock of debts that have been built up. Exchange rate adjustments would normally be seen as an appropriate part of that, and you know better than I do the story that over the last ten years, the US has been trying very hard to persuade China and other countries in Asia to break the link between their currencies and the US dollar, so that the natural stabiliser can be allowed to work.And that hasn't happened, and that's one reason why these imbalances have built up to a point where they threaten both sides to this. So some adjustment needs to be made, and one way or another, the adjustment will have to occur.Governor, you’ve maintained relatively low interest rates or official rates for quite a long period of time, and we've been through 200 billions of quantitative easing. Yet there are parts of the economy, particularly small businesses, small enterprise, entrepreneurship, which don't seem to be getting the credit on the terms that they require it. Are there monetary policy steps which can be taken, or can the Bank take steps directly, to try and make sure some money gets to those parts of the economy?I'm afraid not. I think this is a problem of the structure of the banking system, and questions about the allocation of credit. And those are fiscal actions and they're for government, not for a central bank. It's very dangerous for a central bank to stray, as you know, into political territory, and we don't intend to do that.The amount of lending by the banking system to non-financial companies is falling. It's been falling for some while, and it's still falling. This is a natural consequence of the deleveraging of the banking system. But let's be clear about it, it is falling; and it's
Alex Brummer, Daily Mail:Mervyn King:Heather Stewart, The Observer:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011particularly problematic for small companies because at least big companies can go to the stock market to issue equity, or to the corporate bond markets to raise money through the issuance of bonds. Small companies don't have that opportunity, and they're suffering as a result.But this is a question about the allocation of credit within the economy, and that's very much a fiscal decision, and that is a matter for government.And there's no special credit leveraging that you're able somehow to [bad deterioration of audio - impossible to hear the rest of the question]Well, this has to be a decision for government, because it is a decision about the allocation of credit and distorting the way in which the banking system is operating. And there may be good reasons to do it, and the Bank will certainly be willing to play its role as an agent for government in any scheme that the government decides that it wants to put in place. But it has to be something which is seen as a government scheme, and not a central bank scheme, because otherwise we will be seen to be playing a political role in the allocation of credit.We've got historically high unemployment, particularly youth unemployment; we've got an economy that's barely grown for nine months; and judging by what you've said today, a painful readjustment still to come. We've also seen the worst riots on the streets of London and other cities that anyone can remember. Do you see any connection at all between those facts? And given that we do still face this readjustment that you've talked about, do you fear that there could be more unrest in the months and years ahead?
Mervyn King:Kathryn Hopkins, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Well I'm as shocked and appalled by what has happened as anyone. But I don't know, and nor do you or anyone else in this room know, who has been involved in the trouble, in the criminal violence, why there were involved in it and what the ultimate causes were. And I think it would be deeply irresponsible to speculate on what the causes were before people have had a chance to investigate and study this.I would just point to one fact which I hope will prevent some of the more obvious and irresponsible speculation that I hope doesn't fill our weekend newspapers, which is that over the past year the private sector has created over four times more jobs than have been shed from the public sector.Now these problems are deeply worrying; they are shocking and I'm sure the government will look very closely at them. But it has to be on the basis of detailed information about who has been involved, why they were involved, and what those causes we think were. I'm in no position today to do that, and I would respectfully suggest that no one else is either.Governor, as has been said, one of the biggest drags on UK growth has been elevated inflation eroding real household income. Is there therefore a chance, if another bout of quantitative easing was needed, that it could backfire if boosted inflation and thereby cause a renewed burden on household purchasing power?Well what quantitative easing, or as we prefer to call it, asset purchases, achieves is to inject money directly into the economy. The private sector then decides which assets they want to purchase with that money, and that then moves through the economy, through the changes in risk premia and other yields on a wide range of assets in the economy.
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mervyn King:Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011I see no reason to suppose that it will backfire, or that it will suddenly go from a position in which we think domestically generated inflation is close to zero and below the level consistent with the target, until suddenly you carry out a small amount of asset purchases and suddenly you're projected into a world where some people say we're close to Zimbabwean levels of inflation. I can make absolutely no sense of that argument whatsoever.Some people said that our asset purchases over the past two years would generate massive inflation; they haven't. Domestically generated inflation has been remarkably low. And I think we would engage in asset purchases only if we felt that they were necessary in order to keep inflation close to the target, as opposed to falling below it looking 18 months, two years ahead.Governor, you said one of the main threats to the UK economy comes from shocks in the eurozone, are you satisfied that your counterparts at the European Central Bank and European politicians have a handle on that situation?Well I'm not going to comment on European politicians; I'll leave you to do that. I think the European Central Bank has gone to the outer limit of what a central bank can do. And it's quite clear, and it's clear from its own statements, that any further action really has to be carried out by European governments themselves. You cannot expect a central bank to engage in credit allocation decisions and to be a substitute for the inability to deal with the fiscal problems facing the euro area. That is a problem for governments and not for central banks.Governor, on page 28 you refer to company liquidations ...
Mervyn King: Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday: Mervyn King: Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday: Mervyn King: Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday: Mervyn King: Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Sorry - refer to - ? ... and you're very careful to say ... Sorry I missed the first ... On page 28, sorry. Yes, company liquidations. Yes absolutely. I wasn't sure who you were liquidating.Not people being liquidated, no. And you're very careful to say that the rise in formal liquidations has been quite subdued. And as you'll know there's a lot of concern that the cost of formal liquidation is now such that a lot of companies are just switching themselves off rather than go through the formal insolvency process, and that they are therefore not showing up in the figures.Now given the critical nature of the corporate death numbers for checking the health of the economy, how are you ensuring that you have the best information, because it could be that these figures are wildly understating the level of corporate failures, business failures?It's an interesting question. I'll ask perhaps Spencer to say a word about these numbers in a minute. But what I'll point out is that the Financial Policy Committee, which met for the first time last month, the end of June, when we published our Report we made a formal recommendation that the FSA investigate much more carefully the extent of forbearance by banks to private sector borrowers, in particular companies; the concern being that
Spencer Dale:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011perhaps with commercial property there had been - now obviously some forbearance is probably a good thing because it's either - technically in terms of how it's measured - companies wanting to borrow more, or it could be the case that the bank and the company have reached an agreeable position in which it makes sense not to call in the loan now but to have some forbearance.But it is also possible that banks have been engaging in a degree of forbearance in order to prevent losses being realised, which they would then have to show on their own balance sheet. And we've asked the FSA to investigate and to produce more information for the Financial Policy Committee, which of course would be shared with and would be useful to the Monetary Policy Committee in order to answer exactly the question that you have posed. But perhaps Spencer could say a word about these particular numbers?Indeed. So the issue here is that the suggestion was that for many companies, rather than formally going through the formal process of liquidation, they just sort of de-list themselves from Company House. And some of the reports were suggesting that the scale of that process of de-listing had increased very substantially.To the extent that we can see, we don't think that at all changes the big picture. So if I add in, if I produce a chart showing company liquidations plus an estimate of this degree of de-listing and then look to what extent that has changed over time the same big picture would emerge, which is that the degree of company liquidations, although has picked up, in this recession has picked up by far less than it did in previous recessions, and by far less than we would have expected, given the scale of the depth of the recession.
Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday: Hugo Duncan, Daily Mail:Mervyn King:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Thank you.Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Governor, Chart 1 seems to suggest that you think there is a chance that there could be another recession. Could you just explain exactly what you think that chance is? And if monetary policy is limited in what it can do to help, do you think it is time to loosen fiscal policy instead?Well I've commented on the second already and I'm not going to give a running commentary on fiscal policy. On the first, there is always a chance of significant expansion or contraction of output. I think the important question is to say - what do we think is the most likely path with significant risks, and the balance of risk being on the downside? And as I said before we think the most likely outcome is that there will be a gradual recovery. Given the nature of the causes of this downturn of the world economy, which is the very large levels of debt, we shouldn’t expect a rapid recovery. It will be gradual; that's inevitable, and I don't think there's anything that monetary policy can do about that.It will be a gradual recovery with inflation falling back quite sharply next year, and that's our broad central view. But of course there are many risks to that, and I would hope that the experience of the last week would make everyone understand that lots of unexpected events can occur. And the most important thing is not to pretend that we can forecast them, or predict them, because nobody who's honest can, but simply to be aware that we'll need to react to them when we set our policy.Governor, just the picture that you've painted today is a country, where we're not really able to generate our own growth, and we're not able to generate our own recovery; it's out of our hands. It seems to be dependent on growth externally. And I just
Mervyn King:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011wondered is that the right picture and is that basically a tale of policy paralysis?Well all countries in an open world economy depend on each other. And if our exports suddenly disappear completely, the idea that we could generate our own growth quickly to absorb that fall is fanciful. So we are all dependent on each other; we're in an interdependent world economy, and it's very important that we are successful as a trading nation and that means being exposed to developments in the rest of the world.But as I said, I mean the central view here is that there will be growth, there is a - it's a gradual recovery, but it's still a recovery. And we have seen now - an increase in output during this year. So I think - don't go overboard on this. I don't want to underestimate the gravity of the crisis facing the world economy. It is very serious, and we haven't yet come to grips collectively with dealing with the imbalances and how to unwind them.But having said that, the UK has done what it can in terms of putting the major conditions in place to ensure a rebalancing and a recovery. We have a credible medium term fiscal plan, which many countries do not, and we do. And we have had a depreciation of our exchange rate, which many countries have not had, which puts us in a position where there are incentives to see a rebalancing of demand away from domestic demand towards net trade.But is there nothing more that can be done? Are the policies that are in place now as far as we can go, and just hope that growth is delivered through the ... ?Well, it isn't just we put them in place and hope, because monetary policy can respond every month, and I said that. But
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011that will depend on the outlook when we next meet, and I can't prejudge that today.Really to follow on from what you've said a number of times now, which is that we're facing this debt overhang and it's going to take many years to deal with that. I just wondered if you could elaborate on that inasmuch as you've talked in the past about learning lessons from the experience of Japan. And many people would draw analogies between what we're facing in the UK in terms of a potential balance sheet recession. Have we learnt those lessons, and are we looking at the possibility of facing a similar kind of lost decade?Well I don't think it helps to take one country from the past and say we're going to be like that. Equally, as I've said before, I don't want to downplay the seriousness of the challenges facing the world economy, but I do want to emphasise that these are challenges facing the world economy, not challenges facing the UK because it's the UK.One thing that many countries did in 2008 was to learn the lesson from Japan and to re-capitalise the banks. And that was a very important step forward in trying to ensure that the banks were put on the path to recovery.Now it's still true that the markets have not regained sufficient confidence in funding banks to enable the cost of bank funding to come down as quickly as we would have liked, and indeed, we hoped. And that is a step that is still important. And I think that you can see, when you look at why people are concerned about lending to banks at relatively low rates, it's because they can see that banks are very interconnected and they're also deeply involved in activity around the world. So that you can't look at a major bank and say - well the risk of that bank's balance sheet is
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Charlie Bean:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011entirely determined by what happens in the United Kingdom; it isn't. They are exposed to exposures all over Europe and all around the world. And I think that's why this is a challenge which is reflecting the state of the world economy, and it's the imbalances to which I keep going back because they were the fundamental cause of what went wrong.A slightly wonkish question which is - though one with important fiscal implications. Has the Bank lowered its view of the economy's output potential, and is there any case for doing that if you haven't?Well far from being wonkish it's a very, very important question which the Committee has been deliberating. But let me ask Charlie to describe that?Yes, as the Governor says, this is obviously pretty central what we now regard as the economy's supply capacity. And over the past year or so we've been puzzling between the contrast between the apparent large margin of spare capacity that's opened up because of the big fall in activity on the one hand - that seems to suggest there's a lot of spare capacity to be whittled away - and the business surveys on the other hand, which seem to suggest that in manufacturing now most of the spare capacity has been eroded, and then in the services sector that a good part of it has been eroded.So how does that all fit together? If I can refer you to the charts on page 27 and 28, Charts 3.7 and 3.8. One of the particular features that has been notable over the past year has been the strength of employment growth. If you thought the big decline in output, which wasn't accompanied by a similarly big decline in employment, was just due to firms temporarily hanging onto labour so that capacity hadn't changed, then what you would
Jeremy Warner, Daily TelegraphPage 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011expect is as growth recovers, you get a big bounce back in productivity.We haven't seen that over the past year; employment has grown roughly in line, or only a little bit below the recovery in activity. And that fits with the picture that we've seen with the business surveys, and as I say it's reflected in charts 3.7 and 3.8 here. So over the course of the past year in the light of the behaviour of productivity, we've tended to shift the balance of our judgement towards viewing the impact of the downturn on capacity as being relatively persistent and not a purely cyclical factor.But I would stress that there's a huge degree of uncertainty about this. It may well be that the business surveys are giving a misleading signal, that companies - when they answer the question how much spare capacity they've got - are simply referring to some notion of short run capacity and ignoring the fact that they may have shut down production lines which could be reactivated, or if you take say estate agents, an estate agent has to work much less hard to make a sale when there's lot of people looking to buy and sell than in a market where there are very few buyers and sellers. So the productivity may be endogenous to the level of activity itself.So we have a high degree of uncertainty about what the spare capacity in the economy is, but our assessment is that at the current juncture is that the underlying rate of productivity growth has been very low over the past couple of years and essentially that the recession has led to a relatively long lasting hit on the economy's spare capacity - on the economy's potential output.And what are the implications of that?
Charlie Bean:Linda Yueh, Bloomberg TV:Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Well the implications of that - you would expect - is that there's less downward pressure on inflation because of the margin of spare capacity; and correspondingly that there will be less margin for rapid growth before you start seeing inflationary pressures pick up.Governor, you said that you could re-ignite asset purchases to keep inflation, domestically generated inflation, from falling below zero. Thinking of going back to textbooks, inflation expectations tend to be formed by headline inflation - what people think prices are. So can you just talk us through how you would manage inflation expectations should there be a big gap between domestically generated inflation, that seems to make QE warranted, and yet headline inflation is still being driven by say commodity prices and other factors?Well inflation expectations aren't necessary completely driven by headline inflation. Obviously inflation over the next year is expected in surveys to be high, but that's our own expectation. I see - all the measures of expectations that we see are quite consistent with people out there having the same expectations about inflation as we have, namely high this year but falling back next year.But if inflation expectations were to become detached from our own view as to where inflation we thought was going, that would influence our judgement about the likely path of possibly wages and certainly price setting. And that will in turn then impact on our inflation outlook.So inflation expectations are very important, and indeed it's been a concern that inflation expectations would move up, given the experience of high headline inflation that is the single biggest upside risk to inflation. It's still there in our forecast, and has been
Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011the major reason why we have been looking at this as a reason to offset some of the downside risks that I've talked about, stemming from weak activity.And it's a difficult period to go through with weak activity and strong headline inflation, but we feel there are good reasons now, particularly given the events of the last week, and the start of a fall back in oil and commodity prices, to feel that our central judgement is indeed one in which we feel that's a perfectly sensible view to take. Because there are - I think a reasonable view would be, and financial markets also have this view, that the reason why headline inflation has been pushed up is not going to be repeated next year.The idea that they'll be another rise in value added tax is clearly not part of the government's plans; that will drop out of the index. The idea that they'll be a further very sharp rise in oil and commodity prices, although perfectly possible, doesn't seem to be a sensible position to hold as a central view. And indeed, even if there were to be no further falls in commodity prices, the fact that they wouldn’t be rising as they have been over the past year would bring inflation back down.So all of those reasons suggest that it's a pretty sensible view, and I think this is where the financial markets are, to believe that headline inflation will fall back next year. The discussion on the Committee has not been about that, which everyone buys into, it's been about - how far and how fast will it fall back? Will it really come back to the target, or will it go below the target, or will it in fact stay above the target? That is the debate. And that's why the issues about spare capacity, supply potential and the path of demand in the medium term are so important, not what is going to happen in the next few months.
Hugh Pym, BBC:Mervyn King:David Smith, Sunday Times:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Governor you say you can't - in the report you say you can't spell out the risks emanating from the euro area, you can't quantify them, but you do say they could have a significant effect on the UK economy. Can you try and spell out what you mean by that?Well I said, there are many risks which we don't feel that we can sensibly quantify. If you like, they come under the heading of the unimaginable or the unmentionable. But they are certainly risks which it's foolish to pretend that we have any basis on which to provide a quantitative estimate; we can't. But as we've seen in the last five years there are many events where people who thought that they could quantify exactly the risks facing the position got very surprised when some very unusual event occurred. And I think it's sensible to recognise that there are these shocks that can happen which we are in no position sensibly to quantify, but it's important that we recognise that they could occur.So they are by definition the kind of risks where you can't spell out a very precise description of them, because if you could you might be in a position to be able to provide a plausible probability assessment of it. But we don't find it at all easy to spell out all the things that could possibly happen and therefore we have made it clear that there potentially large risks which we have not felt able to quantify and therefore don't appear in the Fan Charts.Governor, chart two on page seven shows that quite a gap has opened up between the ONS data and the Bank's estimates of the central estimate of the level of GDP. Given what you're saying about the rise in employment over the past year, and given the puzzle over very weak productivity, is it possible that growth over the past year or so has been quite a bit stronger than the ONS has been telling us?
Mervyn King: Charlie Bean:Nils Blythe:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011Let me ask Charlie to answer that.Okay the best thing here is actually to look at the box on pages 22 and 23, which goes into a little bit more detail on the recent path of output, the likelihood of revisions. In the past the Bank staff have done work on the pattern of revisions. You can see in Chart B that on average there tends to be a tendency for data to be revised up - for the growth of GDP to be revised up over time. And in the light of that plus other indicators, the Committee forms a view on the likely range of possible outcomes of activity, not only over the future, but also over the past. And that’s Chart A, and that's the same as the first part of Chart 2 that you referred to.What the box goes on to do is also look at the question of whether revisions to GDP of a plausible magnitude, and the box notes that there's about a three - we assess that there's a three in five chance that the current level of GDP could be revised up by one percentage point or more.The question is - could that explain some of the key puzzles in the data? One of those is the one that I was already referring to with Jeremy about productivity and the apparent mismatch with business surveys. Another one is why net trade has been apparently on the weak side, given how much sterling has fallen. And the conclusion from that box is that plausible revisions to the level of activity would only go a very small direction - a small part of the way in explaining the productivity puzzle, but could do quite a lot to explain away the puzzling weakness of net trade, as you would see quite likely some of the upward revision activity going to higher exports. And equally it would give an explanation for why imports might be stronger then the relationships presently suggest.We're out of time but we'll take one last question.
Alex Brittain, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Nils Blythe:ENDPage 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 10th August 2011So your central GDP forecast is for modest growth, but just quoting back from your statement, "Weaknesses seem to be more persistent than previously thought, headwinds are becoming stronger by the day, and the risks are to the downside." Is it fair for us to assume that the Committee is discussing further asset purchases much more than it was say three months ago?Well I'm afraid you'll have to wait until the minutes of our meeting last week, which are published next week. I don't want to comment on the discussion last week; it would be wrong for me to do so because we have a purdah period and the minutes will appear next week. So don't go on holiday; stay and read the minutes.Good; we're now out of time, so thank you all very much indeed for coming.