Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 11th May 2011
Q&ADaisy McAndrew, ITN:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011Governor, I'm sure you're aware that today marks the one-year anniversary of the coalition government. It's, if you like, their one-year end of term report. Given for that entire year, every three months you've had Inflation Reports where you've had to downgrade growth forecasts, upgrade inflation forecasts, how would you phrase or term their end of year report?I'm afraid I'm not in the business of giving end of year reports. We focus on our job, and we'll do that. But let me try and put it in perspective; try and draw your attention to the medium term outlook for growth which is what is really important in terms of the policy significance of our judgements.And if you look at first of all Chart 5.10 on page 41, that's the histogram of the ranges of growth, the probabilities attached to growth being in particular ranges, and the green bars there reflect the probabilities corresponding to the May forecast we published today - and the black line shows you where that was in February - you can see there hasn't really been any noticeable shift.So what we're seeing is what we believe to be a temporary soft patch over a shorter period, with weaker growth in the first year of the forecast, but not really very much change looking further ahead.And if you now go to page 39, and Chart 5.3 at the top right hand corner, you can see that, given our views for the outlook for demand, supply capacity and so on, that again - another chart showing it in red this time - the probabilities of inflation being in particular ranges and the same outline of that histogram for the February projection - again, you can see there isn't really much of a change.
Daisy McAndrew, ITN:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011So looking to the medium term, we don't think that there is a significant change from February. The big picture is the same as it was in February, and has been for quite a long while. But the short term has changed somewhat. Clearly the implication is that we don't think, in our central view, that the short term movements have really significant implications for the medium term. The big picture is broadly the same.But just - in the text of your Report you do acknowledge that fiscal consolidation is weighing down on growth. That's surely an acknowledgement that, for good or for bad, the cuts are making a big difference to the growth outlook?Any fiscal consolidation was bound to affect the outlook for demand. That's been true really for the last two years in our projections looking forward. So that's part of the rebalancing of the economy where consumption spending needs to slow, both private and public, and we need to switch demand towards net exports and business investment.And indeed, if you look at what happened during 2010, you can see that consumption added absolutely nothing to the growth of output. It contributed zero to the growth of output in 2010. Virtually the whole of the growth of output in 2010 came from contributions from business investment and stock building.Now what we hope as the recovery proceeds is that, obviously the contribution from stock building is bound to wane, but we hope that the contribution from net exports will pick up. And I think the trade data that were published this morning produce a picture which is consistent with that view, which is that we know that exports picked up - at least we know in the sense that the
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011official data currently suggests - that exports picked up by 5% in 2010 and by another 5% in the first quarter of this year.So there are signs that rebalancing is indeed taking place, and it's rebalancing that's vital for the progress which this economy needs to make over the next few years.Governor, the growth and inflation figures are, as expected, worse than you predicted. But that's something that I think we're just living with - we're in that period. I wonder, however, if I could ask you a question about credit, because - if you look at money and the money supply in this Report, - it's just a pretty appalling rate of growth. And all three sectors are almost - barring the post Lehman period - at their historic low level. Are you worried that we might be entering a second credit crunch? You've already pointed to the dangers in the Financial Stability Report about the sheer scale of credit the banks have to roll over; households are retrenching. Are we entering, in fact, a mini second crunch for credit?Well, I think a credit crunch is about the ability and willingness of the banking system to finance lending to the rest of the economy. It's clear that lending to the business sector is still falling, and that shows very clearly in our data. The challenges I think facing the banking sector are clear from the scale of the funding requirement, but the funding has actually improved over the past year. So I don't think that the situation is getting worse; I think gradually, but only gradually, we're seeing the banking sector able to obtain funding - on a somewhat longer term basis, and at obviously higher interest rates.I think the key, from our point of view, to what has been happening, and the reason why Bank Rate has been set at such a low level - if you look at Chart 1.9 on page 14. What Chart 1.9
Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011does is to try to plot an estimate of the marginal cost of funding to banks - the price that banks have to pay to get funds, which they can then lend on to the real economy. And it plots it against Bank Rate.And what you can see is the enormous gap, relative to historical experience, between the rate at which banks are paying for their funding and Bank Rate. And obviously that explains why Bank Rate is in large part so low, because if we were to raise Bank Rate, that would push up further the cost of funding to banks.Now what we would hope is that, as the situation of the banks improves over time - and I've always said this will take a long time; there's no quick fix here. Once you've had a major financial crisis, it's a matter of years before the health of the banking sector is restored. But over time I think that will happen, and I think there's no doubt - and the IMF numbers they've produced in their Spring Financial Stability Report supported this - at least compared with many Continental European banks - the UK banks have actually raised the amount of capital that they've got, and they have reduced their dependence on wholesale funding. So I think there has been an improvement.But what we will hope is that that wedge between Bank Rate and the marginal cost of funding will gradually come down - that would then be likely to be a time in which it would be natural for Bank Rate to move up somewhat - but then that would not necessarily imply that the cost of capital to the real economy would necessarily rise.And you can see that there hasn't been any obvious change in the marginal cost of funding to banks over the last couple of years. And that wedge needs to narrow in order for us to be confident
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King: Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011that the banking system will be able to fund a recovery in the way that it did in the past.Now the last point I'd make is that what we've looked at from past experience, and what you can see now is that, in terms of the growth of the UK economy as a whole, big companies which account for the bulk of investment, do not depend heavily on the banking system; they can obtain money directly from capital markets - either bond finance or equity finance - and that's exactly what they've been doing. This is a story that tells you quite a lot about the problems facing smaller firms.Just supplementary to that then - I mean, first, are you taking this spread between banks and the Bank Rate into account in rate setting?Absolutely; absolutely. And in making the forecast.So it's a factor that bears against rate rises in the short to medium term?Well, other things being equal, it clearly influences - it's why Bank Rate was cut to such a low level, and why we have decided - it's part of the factors leading into our judgement that have led us to keep Bank Rate at its current level.And secondly, then, I mean, you intimated in the Part 1.5 about money, that we might actually be in a kind of quasi permanent situation where growths in nominal output don't actually figure in the money supply. I mean, how do we explain this non-recovery of money supply if you're getting a gradual improvement in credit conditions?
Mervyn King:Linda Yueh, Bloomberg TV:Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011Well, if you saw a gradual improvement in credit conditions, then I would expect and hope that broad money supply would pick up. I think the very low levels of broad money are reflecting in part the contraction of the size of the balance sheet of the banking system. Their assets are coming down; their liabilities therefore have to come down, and the counterpart of that is obviously broad money supply. But that is one of the factors which is exerting a dampening impact on spending and hence on inflation.And that is why I think, if you think back to the studies that various people have made about the consequences of financial crises, you don't see a rapid recovery from financial crises precisely because of these factors that we've been discussing.Governor, as the ECB and other central banks tighten, low interest rates in the UK may imply sterling weakness. As inflation is being imported from global commodity prices, can you talk us through, please, what the MPC's view is on sterling and the tightening which is happening elsewhere?The broad picture we take is that markets determine the level of the exchange rate. We have to take it into account in or judgements, and we do. I think the fall in the exchange rate that we saw between the end of 2007 through to the beginning of 2009 was part of the adjustment that was sensible for markets to make in anticipation of the need for a rebalancing of the UK economy. I think that's been justified.Since then sterling's been broadly stable, as indeed it was for quite a long period before. And stability is otherwise a good thing.But what the Committee does is to take into account the impact of movements in the exchange rate on the outlook for inflation. It
Tadhg Enright, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011clearly has affected the short run path of inflation, without any doubt, but it's a necessary part of the rebalancing.Governor, we're reading another report here in which we project that inflation is to get worse and growth is also to be worse. I mean, given that your projections on the current state of commodity prices is not abating, and growth is flatter than expected, would you characterise that the MPC is perhaps helpless to restrain inflation? And is there a sense of perhaps relief now that the heat appears to be coming off the pressure for a rate rise?It's not helpless at all, but it can't do a great deal to offset movements in the very short term. And I think if you look at the charts and the table in Section 4, page 30 - you can see that the challenge that we face, which is the first chart there - Chart 4.1 shows, in swathe form, different ranges of estimates of the contribution of value added tax, energy prices and import prices to CPI inflation. And you can see for, you know, the last couple of years, that's contributed almost around 31⁄2, 4 percentage points to the inflation rate. The green swathe says - well, what's the contribution of domestically generated inflation? Around zero.So what we're faced with is a dilemma in which the domestically generated contribution to inflation is well below the target, and the contribution of these other facts is well above the target, and have been pushing it up.Now I think we've seen how sensitive inflation is to these short-run movements, and what we've also seen is how unpredictable they are. Oil prices are 17% higher than we and the market thought they would be three months ago, when we last met. That's a big change. It's going to have a big effect on inflation in the short run people are now anticipating that there will
Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011be rises in utility prices in the summer and autumn. We've pencilled in - we make it clear in the Report - that this forecast, this set of projections, is conditioned on the assumption that electricity prices will go up by 15% and gas prices by 10%. Those are big movements. Now if you - sorry, it's gas 15 and electricity 10 - gas 15 and electricity 10. Now if you look at Table 4.A below the charts I've just been talking about, you will see what an impact these kind of changes can have. So the first row shows that - okay, so if petrol prices move by 10% - that's a half percentage point either on or off the inflation rate, depending on which way petrol prices move. And a 10% change in electricity and gas prices also moves CPI inflation by half a percentage point.Now what we're seeing - since we agreed this document at the end of last week - is that oil prices fell by 10%. Well, that could have knocked a significant amount off the inflation projection. On the other hand it's come back 5% since that 10% fall, so that would have offset at least part of that. Other commodity prices have fallen by 5% - this is all in less than a week.So the idea that anybody can sensibly predict where they're going to be even six months from now I think is foolish. All we can do is to have a range. That's why the fan chart is so important. There's no point in pretending that we can know where it will go; we can't. But what the events of the last week at least do is to demonstrate that these prices do not move only in one direction. They can move down as well as up. And the projections over the next nine months or so are very sensitive to these short run movements.But the projection looking further ahead is much less sensitive to that. There, there is obviously uncertainty, but it depends upon the bigger judgements about how much spare capacity there is, how quickly the recovery is likely to come through, and whether or not wages and prices will remain restrained. Those are difficult
Sam Fleming, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011judgements, but they're much less sensitive to these big movements in commodity prices than the short run forecast is.And the big point I want to get across to you is that our medium term judgement, right or wrong, but our medium term judgement about inflation and growth is broadly the same as it was in February.Can I ask a question about the situation in the Eurozone? The CDS are now pricing in about a 70% chance of restructuring in Greece. It seems clear that the ECB does not see that as a desirable outcome for the European financial system. I wonder if that's a judgement that the Bank of England agrees with?And also how are you building in the resumption of instability in the Eurozone periphery, or the risk of a further disruption there into your own downside risks and growth outlook and policy outlook?The assumptions we've made about growth in the euro economy and in the world economy at large is a continuing modest rate of growth. I'll ask Charlie to say a bit more about that in a moment. There are obviously risks, but I think they are very hard to calibrate.In terms of what is happening in the euro area, it's very clear that there are serious problems and challenges facing the euro area, and I don't want to make life more difficult by making public comment on the situation in which they find themselves. So if you'll forgive me, I'm going to restrict my comments today to the UK economy, which is the focus of the Inflation Report.
Charlie Bean:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011But perhaps Charlie could say something about the judgements that have been made about the rate of growth of the European economy and indeed the world economy?Well as far as the euro area goes, I mean the striking feature of course has been - although overall growth in the euro area has been reasonably satisfactory, like us it’s been experiencing a muted rebound from the recession, but nevertheless recovery. But of course divergence across different parts of the euro area. And Chart 2.12 on page 21 illustrates that pretty starkly, with Germany - representative of the core - growing pretty strongly in recent quarters, but the euro area periphery countries continuing to contract.And it's clear that those periphery countries face significant challenges. It's not easy to know what the right solution is going to be here. As far as the forecast goes, the central view is conditioned on continued moderate growth in the euro area, but there has to be a risk that there is a messy consequence of the problems in the euro area periphery.The main impact to us I think would be, not through trade linkages - with the exception of Ireland those trade linkages are not particularly important for us - but insofar as there are ramifications through the banking system, concerns about counterparty exposures throughout the European banking system, which lead to renewed tightening within financial and bank funding markets.The other important linkage potentially is what we saw in the aftermath of the collapse of Lehman's was a generalised adverse impact on household and business confidence. It's very difficult to know how big those effects might be, but it is one of the factors that lies behind the continued downside risk that we have in the growth fan charts.
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King: Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011Governor, I wanted to probe a little bit more deeply the medium term structural outlook for the economy. Basing - really on your comments that it's the levels that matter, stupid, not the growth rate, so you've got a chart of the growth rates being similar can imply - and does imply actually - a rather lower level of output than was expected in February.YesJust to put it a little bit more starkly, the last time you changed monetary policy was in November '09. Then you thought the level of inflation now would be 1.22%, the level of year-on-year growth would be 4.57%, and the level of output if you back work it out would be 1.5% higher than it is actually now. This latest forecast revision will make the medium term revision look about 2% - I sort of in my head worked out - lower level of output in the medium term than we thought.What's gone wrong with the recovery? Is it persistent, and how is this sort of level change influenced your thinking?Well, I think another way of summarising the facts that you put is to say that a year ago we thought that growth in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this would be of the order of 11⁄2 percentage points, taken together. That hasn't happened. That explains the shortfall of the level of output relative to where we expected before.So what we've seen is a clear soft patch at the end of last year and beginning of this. And we're, you know, very open in the Report that the big question facing us is whether that soft patch is a temporary soft patch or whether it continues and presages a period of further weakness. No one can know that.
Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011I think our central view is that it is a temporary soft patch, clearly coming from weakness in consumption. But only time will tell, and we'll have to form a judgement.What we've also done - and this is extremely hard to know how to make a judgement on this - we have assumed that much of that weakness in demand and output has reflected also a lower level of productivity, and hence the potential supply capacity of the economy has been lowered a bit as well.Now that is a very uncertain judgement, and we will have to watch extremely carefully for signs of whether that it a sensible judgement or not. I think the fact remains that we are faced with genuine puzzles in the behaviour of the labour market; employment has been much stronger than we expected and correspondingly productivity weaker. But equally nominal wage growth itself has been remarkably stable, and running at around 2% a year is well below - well below the levels that one would normally think of as being consistent with meeting the inflation target.So I think looking ahead, the judgement we've taken is that the weakness in output over the last two quarters is a temporary phenomenon. I think that's partly supported by the view that in the first quarter at least, the first estimate of the ONS did have, you know, clear signs of a pickup in manufacturing and service sector growth. The weakness was primarily in construction. That may tell us something about where growth is likely to go in the rest of this year.So our central view is that we'll see a modest recovery. We're not expecting a particularly strong recovery; we don't really see - it's only really in the medium term that the chance of growth being
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011above its historical average is the same as being below it; so it's not a buoyant recovery in that sense. But it's a steady recovery at modest growth rates which is the kind of thing I think one would normally expect coming out of a deep financial crisis.But there are clearly risks to that on the downside, and we will see as we go on whether those risks materialise. And that's why it's very hard to be certain where we are going, and very difficult to know exactly where policy will go. We will have to wait and react to the data as they come in.A very quick follow up. I appreciate it's all terribly uncertain, but what is your judgement on - how much have you cut the sustainable rate of growth of the economy?We haven't changed our view about the long run sustainable growth rate. What we have changed, if you like, is the cumulative impact on productivity of the events of the last few years. So we're starting from a lower level of supply capacity than we would have expected six months or a year ago, because of the soft patch, but going forward from now we haven't changed our view about the underlying growth rate of productivity - which in our judgement has been pretty steady right through the last 50 or 60 years.And we didn't increase that view when, in the period before the crisis, many were saying that productivity growth rates had picked up. You remember the debate in the US about higher productivity growth? We didn't make any judgement of that kind; we didn't push it up then, and I don't think we particularly want to push it down looking further ahead.I think that the very problematic judgement is to know what the cumulative impact on the levels is going to be as a result of the
Julian Harris, City AM:Mervyn King:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011events of 2007 through whenever the crisis can be said finally to have come to an end. The cumulative impact of the banking and financial crisis on the level of productivity - and that is very hard.On page 31 of the Report you're saying that the Bank estimates that three quarters of the VAT rise has been passed through into prices, which would be almost 2%. This seems quite high at a time of, as you say, very weak domestic demand. Could you just confirm that that is an estimate that these forecasts are based on?Also, if it's acceptable for inflation to remain above target for several years, as it seems like doing - albeit for supposedly temporary reasons - does this mean that it works the other way so that in other times, when inflation is significantly below target, that this is acceptable and that at those times potentially there's a case for even stronger monetary policy than has been or would have been the case?Clearly if there are very unexpected movements in price levels, whether they be energy prices or commodity prices, or even the exchange rate, they will have effects on inflation. And if they are thought to be temporary effects, then it would not be sensible to react to try to offset them, because that would create excess volatility, undesirable volatility in output. And the remit says we should not do that.I regard that as a completely symmetrical objective, both on either side of it, and would react in the same way. We have seen in the last few years a sequence of shocks to energy and commodity prices that, with great respect, I don't think anyone really anticipated. No one plotted the path and said - that's definitely what's going to happen. Certainly financial markets didn't. The futures price by and large was always, after one of these shocks,
Spencer Dale:Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011that from now on, although it wasn't necessarily expected to reverse or unwind, prices would be broadly stable from then on.And as I say, after we'd finalised these projections, lo and behold oil prices fell 10% in a couple of days. So, that’s a lesson to everyone that these prices can move around very significantly. And there's nothing we can do about that. But I don't think we have a particular bias in any sense; we just have to accept these movements in prices, and form a judgement as to what makes sense looking 18 months, two years or so ahead, in the way that we've always done.But, Spencer, do you want to comment on the VAT assumptions?Yes, though trying to assess the precise degree of pass through is obviously difficult. Our best estimate is around, as you say, around three quarters of the increase in VAT was passed through, which is likely to add a little - just a little more than one percentage point to the inflation rate. And that will then stay in the inflation rate for the year, and then will drop out at the beginning of next year.So if there had been full pass through, the total impact on CPI inflation would be just under one and a half percentage points, and we think it's around 75%. So it gives you just a little bit more than one percentage point additional impact on CPI inflation for the next year.Just two quick questions Governor, just a follow up to Chris's question first. Do you think that - I want you to reflect on your former Deputy Governor, John Gieve's comments that something permanent may have happened to the economy and the sustainable growth rate of the economy might be 1 to 11⁄2%. Is
Mervyn King:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011your judgement that that's wrong at the moment, or that it's plausible?And secondly, commodity prices is obviously a big impact on inflation, and I'm just wondering whether the Bank has assessed the impact of speculation and whether or not anything regulatory could be done about that?I'll ask Charlie to take the second one in a moment on commodity prices. On the first one I don't think there's any reason to suppose that the long run growth rate of the UK economy - potential growth rate, leaving to one side for the moment labour supply, but looking at productivity - has changed a great deal. It's been very steady for a long time. And I don't think what we've been through creates any reason to suppose that will be different in the long run.I think what is, however, true is that we are, or have been through a period in which over several years we have been adjusting to the consequences of this major shock, largely coming through the financial system. And that does seem - and experience would suggest that it would - have some permanent impact on the level of potential output, or at least an impact on the level of potential output that is going to last for a very long time, if not indefinitely. And what that means - and I think the best way of seeing this perhaps is to look at the Chart 3.4 on page 26.Now Chart 3.4 on page 26 plots that actual movements in labour productivity in manufacturing on the one hand, and services on the other. And it also plots the trend which was being followed by productivity. And you can see that both in services and in manufacturing, there has been a real jolt to productivity since the crisis hit, and that, you know, after three years the level of productivity was the same as it was when the crisis hit. We have
Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011lost, if you like, the normal rise in productivity in those sectors that would take place.Now that can be partly the consequence of labour hoarding, or other factors which have led to a temporary slowing in labour productivity. And it can also be partly a permanent, or indefinite impact on the level of potential productivity.Looking ahead, I don't see any reason to suppose that we won't get back to the same trend paths for manufacturing and services as we did before. Of course a lot more - that's a guess, but I don't see any compelling arguments contrary to that at this stage. What I do think is that the changes in the structure of the economy could have some impact. Now in his very interesting piece this morning, Chris Giles talked about the impact of the financial sector, how that might slow the growth of productivity. I think that's an open question, and I think it does go - at the heart of that is the question of whether the statisticians, not just in this country, but in all countries can acurately measure the output of the financial sector. I have real doubts about that myself, but there are potential difficulties there.But also what you can see here from the chart clearly is that normally the growth rate of productivity in manufacturing is higher than that of the service sector - that's true in most countries. And in which case if we rebalance our economy in the direction of investment and net trade over the next few years you would expect that that slight shift, relative to where it would otherwise have been in the share of manufacturing versus services, would actually boost the growth rate of productivity.Now my guess is that all these things will come out in the wash and there won't really be any noticeable effect. In 30 years down
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King: Charlie Bean:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011the road we'll look back and say there was no obvious sign of a change in the underlying growth rate of productivity.But you know, no one can really tell, I just don't think that what we've seen in the last three or four years tells us very much at all about the long run growth rates of productivity; it tells us an awful lot about the level. And as Chris implied in his question, the judgement that's relevant for policy now is to know how big that level effect is, because that will determine the extent to which there is spare capacity in the economy, and the extent to which we can experience above trend growth at some point without seeing inflationary pressures. And the honest answer is that no one knows the answer to that question, but it doesn't look at if we're going to be troubled by that for the immediate quarter or two anyway.Just on speculation, I'll draw you to the fact that many of the world's sort of most important chief executives are now suggesting that speculation is a factor, so I'd be very interesting to hear with the Bank's work reflects that?Let me ask Charlie on that.The first thing I think that is worth pointing out, people use speculation as a pejorative term in this. But you should expect the price of commodities like oil, an exhaustible resource, to have a forward-looking element in them. Oil producers are faced with a question - do I take the oil out of the ground today, or out of the ground tomorrow when the price might be different? So inherently there has to be a forward-looking expectational element in there. And the question then becomes is this forward looking behaviour - speculation if you want to call it that - leading to excessive and unwarranted volatility? But you should start from the premise that you should expect the price of something
Mervyn King:Paul Fisher:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011like oil to be quite volatile because it is an asset and it has this forward-looking element to it.Now I think it's fair to say when we, the OECD, IMF, people like this have looked at this in the past, they've tended to find a fairly limited role for financial activities perhaps in the short run. But the underlying trend in oil and other commodities can usually be described pretty well by the underlying fundamentals of what's going on.Having said all that, this is something that's very much on the G20's radar at the moment. There's a working group which is reviewing all of the evidence. It's due to report to the finance ministers and central bank governors later on in the year and then potentially to the leaders at the Cannes Summit. And there may be some policy recommendations that come out of that, if the conclusion is that the increased use of commodities as an asset class is leading on occasions to excessive price volatility and therefore harmful effects on the real economy. As far as I'm concerned, and the Bank's concerned, we have an open mind on that question.Perhaps I could also bring in Paul, because I think Paul was involved in a G7 study - this keeps coming up, we did a G7 study not so long ago.Yes, this question has been asked before many times. There is always clearly some froth appears on commodity markets when they reach the peak - you saw that last week that sort of movement up and down can only be positioning in markets coming in and going off. But fundamentally commodities like oil, metals, food - they have to be taken to delivery. And so the price at the point at which somebody actually takes them tends to be driven more by fundamentals and that's what previous studies
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011have tended to find. So it doesn't rule out that there is some role for speculative short-term behaviour, if you like, at the margin on the top.The situation is somewhat different in precious metals, where it's much easier for an investor to take physical delivery and therefore trade with the view to the future price movements. But in the fundamental commodities, previous exercises have not really revealed that - although as I say I wouldn't deny there's clearly some froth at the top of markets, as there always is.Governor, you've talked a lot about the medium term and about policy decisions now affecting inflation in 18 months, two years time. Chart 5.13 on page 47, which shows the inflation projection at constant interest rates, has inflation in two years time above target, as does that accompanying text. On that basis shouldn't the MPC be raising rates relatively soon?Well the fact that a projection based on the assumption of a constant Bank Rate for three years has inflation picking up and being just above the target in two years time does suggest that Bank Rate can't stay at this level indefinitely, and I'm very happy to confirm that and to say that at some point Bank Rate will undoubtedly need to return to more normal levels. But I don't think that tells you precisely which month. And that is something we look at month by month and it's a question we will explore each and every month as we go ahead. So there is no doubt - and I'm very happy to confirm - that Bank Rate will need to rise at some point; it cannot stay at this level indefinitely.That doesn't tell you I'm afraid when Bank Rate will rise, but that is something that we examine all the time and think about carefully. And indeed if we were to feel that the position were moving in the opposite direction then policy might need to be eased further. But
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011the question that the Committee has been focused on obviously in recent months has been the question of whether now is the time to start tightening policy, and the majority of the committee has taken the view that so far it has not been. But that is something which we have to revisit every month, certainly.Are you saying that it has to rise over the next two years, which is the market assumption?Well the market is not saying it has to rise over two years, the market is saying on average, and that seems a reasonable judgement. But all kinds of unexpected things can happen. I would have thought one of the lessons of the last four years was that the idea that we definitely know what is going to happen in the next two years is something that no one with any sanity should be pretend to claim to be in a position of doing. We just do not know. But there is no doubt that given the challenges we face, that at some point the Bank will certainly have to raise Bank Rate in order to return to more normal levels.And I think to go back to the discussion we were having before with Paul about the chart that I showed, chart 1.9 on page 14, I would hope that over the next couple of years or so, that that spread between Bank Rate and the funding rate of banks would start to come down. Then at that point, then even to maintain the current stance of monetary policy, a rise in Bank Rate would be needed. Now all kinds of other things will be changing obviously at the same time, but you know this is a judgement that we have to make in terms of what is the effective cost of credit to the real economy, what is going on in the economy, what is happening to money supply, what's happening to wages; these are things we have to look at month in, month out. And I don't think there's any point our pretending that we know the future path of Bank Rate, other than to say that it cannot stay at this level indefinitely.
Nick Edwards, Reuters Insider Television:Mervyn King:Nick Edwards, Reuters Insider Television:Mervyn King:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011On those fan charts on page 47, what do they look like with the £200 billion of assets purchases removed from them? And what does that tell us about what you're likely to move first when you move policy, is it going to be Bank Rate, or is it going to be a reduction in asset purchases?Can you say the last bit again?Yes, is it going to be a reduction in the level of asset purchase that you've got, so you'll start paying that down, or rather removing it away?Well what I had said at the last press conference was that the view on the Committee is that we are very likely in our first move, first tightening move, to raise Bank Rate. And the reason for that is that when the time comes to sell assets we will want to do so in an orderly way, not just a bit here one month, and a bit there another month or two later, but to announce a programme of asset sales. And to do that we would want to be in a position where we were confident that we had got to the point where we wanted to tighten policy over that period and that it was sensible to do it through asset sales.And I think the conclusion from that is that the first move that we would make would be to raise to Bank Rate, of course the Committee can take a different view when it comes to it, but that's the presumption of the Committee; we have discussed it. We haven't made any forecasts on the assumption that we would suddenly go from £200 billion. We certainly could not sell £200 billion in one month, I can assure you.
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011Just a couple of things, firstly I know you've said that you don't want to say anything that would make the Eurozone's governments’ job any harder, but maybe you might want to say something that would make it easier, in the sense that - would you at least agree that the world, and indeed the European financial system, is in a better place now to deal with a debt restructuring by Greece, or maybe other countries that it was a year ago when all of these bailouts were announced? And in that sense the measures that were taken last year have done what they needed to do - I mean have succeeded on that, at least in giving the world time to think about this situation and prepare for a possible restructuring?You're always very reasonable and you're drawing me in to this web in which you have used words in your questions which I don't really want to comment on. So to be perfectly honest, I think the problems are very difficult, they're very challenging and I don't want to make life more difficult by making any public comment that could conceivably make it more difficult for those charged to deal with it. A lot of private conversations take place obviously, I don't think this is the moment for me to comment publicly. And I'm sorry about that, but try another question.I will try. To go back yet again to this question of levels and how much - what the permanent impact of the crisis has been, but also possibly the permanent impact of this soft patch and a period of subdued growth due to the fiscal consolidation. There's quite a lot of evidence and there's certainly a lot of practical reasons to think that the speed at which you use up the spare capacity can actually affect the amount of spare capacity you end up having, because companies that might have been able to survive for the last two years just end up going to the wall because they don't have the demand over the next year. People who are out of the labour market for longer may lose skills that they have now.
Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011And obviously you are worried about the permanent effect of this period of slow growth, whatever is causing it, but do you think it also might affect the trade-off in retrospect when thinking about a prolonged - or a period of very tough fiscal consolidation. That we may actually pay long-term levels - in terms of the level of our output, a long-term cost for this period of slow growth?Well the idea that there can be at least persisting for a period impacts of slower growth on potential output is clearly one that we saw from earlier experience in the UK economy, and it's one which the Committee has taken on board in making its judgements. And indeed part of the assumptions underlying the judgements in these forecasts is one that says - given what's happened to unemployment, if it persists at this level then it will have a somewhat diminishing impact in terms of pushing down on inflation.I don't think that that means that you end up with a permanent loss of output because that can be unwound. It will take time again, but you can bring - as we did in the 1990s and the first half of the 2000s you can bring unemployment back down again, provided you do it reasonably steadily. And as I say, that will be something that we would have to think about more carefully if this soft patch were to prove something more persistent. But that’s hypothetical at this stage. I mean, as I said earlier, we saw in the first quarter signs that both manufacturing and services were growing at rates perfectly consistent with the sort of recovery that we had been expecting for some while.Now I don't want to just pick - and cherry pick those, because consumption was very weak, but there is obviously uncertainty about what happened in the economy in that six month period and whether it was a very weak fourth quarter and a stronger first
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011quarter; we'll see. As we go through this year we'll see the impact of this and whether the growth of output recovers. Our central view is that the growth of output will gradually pick up and we will see that. And if that is the case then I don't think that we would have any significant or serious impacts of this slower period of growth because we'd be back to a period at which growth wasn't that far off trend again.But that is uncertain, it is very uncertain and we'll have to see. And I accept that if you were to enter a period of prolonged weakness of the sort of zero growth that we saw in the last two quarters, that might well have an impact on the potential level of output in the longer run.[no microphone] ... in the sense you're not .... Moving on you're permanently - slightly different, slightly lower ...But whether that is a good or bad judgement remains to be seen. I mean I think it is very much an open question as to whether the soft patch that we've been through, if it proves to be temporary, would have any permanent effect; it's not obvious that it would. But it is very hard to know and I think the difficulty is whether or not it's revealing that the impact of the banking and financial crisis had a bigger impact on potential output than we had thought so a year or so ago. But I don't think it tells us much about the fact that output as such was growing slowly for a period of six months. We've seen that on many occasions on the past. There's very little evidence that merely having two quarters of slowish growth had a permanent effect on productivity.A prolonged recession is a different question, but we're not in that.And on the judgement on the fiscal side, it's got longer term ...
Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian: Laughter Mervyn King: Larry Elliott, The Guardian: Mervyn King:Laughter Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011Well I don’t think - it's nothing to do with fiscal as such, it's the what it means for the total level of demand and output.Have you finished now Stephanie?Sorry Larry. I'm sorry to butt in ... No, no do - and welcome.I just wondered whether you could explain a bit more about why you think this soft patch is going to be temporary, because if you look at consumer spending which is obviously the biggest component of demand, and look at the factors bearing down on consumer spending, they're all in place aren't they? You've got a weak housing market, you've got fiscal tightening, you've got taxes going up, you've got wages growing much more slowly than inflation. Everything is in place there for last year's fall in real personal disposable incomes to be repeated for a second year. And if consumer spending is weak and stock building has already taken place, it's hard to see why investment should really pick up that much. I mean why should people sitting on a pile of cash spend that money on new equipment or new plant at a time when consumer demand is weak and looks like it's going to be weak for some time to come? And I just wondered why you think we're going to get through this soft patch very quickly, it seems to put an awful lot of pressure on the external sector to lift the economy up, which gives me the feeling that there's either going to be a very
Mervyn King:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011weak recovery, much weaker than you think or a fairly joyless one even if you're right?Well these are difficult judgements, but if you look at 2010 as a whole, business investment and stock building actually added 21⁄2 percentage points to growth and consumption added nothing. So it's not as if we start from a position where growth was the result of consumption and consumption has suddenly become weak.Consumption has fallen a long way since its peak before the crisis. Whether it will fall further I think remains to be seen. But our central view is that consumption does remain extremely weak over the next year. We don't have any strong pickup of consumer spending at all, so we're not relying on that.The numbers that came out this morning confirm that at least in the first estimate exports did grow at a pretty buoyant rate in the first quarter and that we're beginning to see now more of a contribution from net trade. Now, that is uncertain, but I do think that a sensible economic judgement would be that after a very significant and sustained 20% fall in the real exchange rate that you'd expect that to have some impact on net trade, and that in order to support that, it would not be unreasonable to see some of the quite sharp fall in investment that took place unwinding. So it's not as if we expect investment permanently to remain at low levels, it fell very sharply, partly because of the credit crunch and there is some recovery in it.Now you know we've made a central view that says we expect not particularly exciting growth, not the kind of growth that you would normally expect recovering from a recession, which would be above trend growth, but gradually coming back to growth around its historical average, supported by a combination of business investment, net trade, a slow and delayed recovery in consumer
Nils Blythe, Bank of England: Mervyn King: Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011spending. Those things all taken together add up to our central view. There are risks on either side of that, you know it could even be faster, but it could be weaker I accept. That remains to be seen.I don’t think there's any - I mean we're not assuming here that consumer spending bounces back in any sense. We have built in sluggish, very slow growth in consumer spending through this forecast, for exactly the reason that you gave, a continued squeeze through this year on real incomes.Well I'm afraid that that is actually ... You want ...It just seems to be that the message to the great British public though is this is going to be at best slow, but it's going to be fairly joyless isn't it, because if there is going to be growth, people aren't going to really detect it very much, it's not going to obvious to the man and woman in the street that the economy is recovering?I'm not trying to say how people will perceive it; I'm talking here about what it means for growth and inflation. But there is no doubt that we are facing a period, a difficult time ahead. I've never concealed that, and I said it consistently; we are facing a difficult time ahead with a slow and prolonged adjustment to the consequences of the banking and financial crisis.The rebalancing of the UK economy, which implies slow growth in consumer spending and in public spending, will take not just one year, but several years, and the switch to business investment and net exports will also take several years.
Nils Blythe, Bank of England:ENDPage 30 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th May 2011I'll leave it to you to think of the appropriate adjectives, but that's the economics of it and it's not something that we can expect to happen quickly, but it is vitally important. And we are in a position in the UK where we can do this. There are many other countries, to which Stephanie alluded, that are finding it very difficult to find a path towards this rebalancing. And it's precisely because they can't find a path to rebalancing that they face the problems that they do. So it will be a difficult period ahead, but it is important that we carry on with this rebalancing.Well I'm afraid that really is all we have time for, so thank you all very much indeed for coming.