Bank of England Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009
Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009You say in the Inflation Report, as usual, that it's predicated on the budget forecasts for fiscal tightening in the future. But then you also say that a more credible plan is necessary; and both political parties have said that they intend potentially to have more of a fiscal tightening than has been indicated. I just wonder - can you give an illustration as to what effect that will have on the inflation forecasts and on GDP forecasts? I mean, doesn't it make the current projection slightly useless if we don't know precisely how that's going to be affected by quite big changes in the fiscal outlook?Well, until you can tell me what the changes in that fiscal outlook will be, it's actually very hard to say how this will be affected by it. And what we've done is to adopt the convention we've always adopted since the outset of this process, which is to condition the forecast on the latest announced plans for nominal public spending and effective tax rates. And that of course does contain within it a considerable reduction in the deficit over the next five years.But we've also taken into account the fact that, because - for the very reasons that you gave - it's quite plausible that private sector agents have already decided that there's likely to be some further fiscal consolidation, and that may well be affecting their consumption plans now and over the forecast horizon. So we have taken into account in our forecasts some impact of concerns among households for what this might mean for disposable incomes in the future.But I think there's rather little we can do except wait for the government to announce the PBR in four weeks time, and to await what happens in the Budget next year and the year after, and see what happens. And we will - the important thing is that we will know what is happening and we can respond to it.
Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009But it's fair to say that the inflation projections would be lower and so would GDP potentially were there fiscal tightening?Well, I don't like to make hypothetical statements about what our projections would look like if something else happened, because by the time they do, lots of other things will have happened as well. And all we can do is to react to events as they unfold, and we'll do that for fiscal policy in the same way as we do it for every other aspect of the world economy and domestic conditions that feed into our forecast.As you mention in the Report, Governor, the Bank of England's policies, but of course the very loose monetary policy and expansion of liquidity by central banks around the world have pushed up pretty much all asset markets significantly over the last six or seven months. And there's been some concern that another asset boom is being triggered which is not really filtering through to the real economy.Firstly, do you think there's a risk of that, and are there negative consequences to that? And secondly, do you think, if that were the case, that you actually have any better tools or capacity to prevent a damaging bubble than you did a few years ago?Well, I think it's pretty obvious that if the very accommodative monetary conditions at present were to persist indefinitely, then undoubtedly we would see not only asset prices rise to levels that would concern us, but also inflation would rise to a level that would worry us; it would go above target but of course because no central bank in the world is saying that it intends to carry on this policy for ever. At some point clearly monetary policy will be tightened. We know how to do that; the question is when, and precisely at what pace. That's going to be the difficult
Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009judgement. But what will drive that decision will be the outlook for inflation.In terms of asset prices, I think it's very important that we don't end up in a world in which everyone seems to describe any increase in asset prices as a bubble and any fall in asset prices as the bursting of a bubble. I mean, that's not a very informative or helpful use of terminology.So the question I think that people worried about before was - was there the case that we would see rapid expansion of credit which would fuel asset price increases and lead to a cycle moving upwards, and then the bubble would burst and it would fall downwards.Well we're not seeing any great expansion of credit; indeed if we could see credit growing more rapidly, that would be a welcome step in terms of moving back towards recovery. So I think in these conditions it would be rather peculiar to worry that asset prices were approaching conditions that some people - I never myself found the word bubble particularly helpful; I think you need to know what exactly is meant by it, and what are the conditions underlying it that make you concerned.To the extent that one was worried before by the rapid growth of credit - and I think it is fair to say that there was a very rapid growth of credit, particularly within the financial sector - there was a cause for concern. That doesn't seem to be true now. And the increase in asset prices that we've seen, particularly in the last eight or nine months, are in part I think a reflection of the fact that a possibility of a real disaster has sharply diminished. So the actions that have been taken around the world have very sharply diminished the prospect of something like the Great Depression.
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009That in itself was bound to remove some of the tail risk that would have led to asset prices having fallen so much, and lead to a rebound of asset prices. That's to be welcomed, not to worry about it. And it's still the case, if you look at asset prices, they're well below the levels that they reached in the peak. So it's not as if people have re-inflated some bubble based on a rapid expansion of credit that appears unsustainable.But people do see huge financial profits being made from those rises, which don't seem to be filtering through to the real economy from the financial sector.No, and I think that, to the extent that any financial institution has a balance sheet on which there are assets on one side of that balance sheet, and you see that asset prices rebound over the course of six to nine months, then any mark to market valuation of those assets is going to show enormous profits. But they are if you like one-off profits resulting from a revaluation.It's not the case that banks are able to go out and borrow very cheaply and lend it at much higher rates. I mean, banks themselves are struggling to borrow money at present; the conditions are improving, but they're not in a position to borrow particularly cheaply. That's the reason why they have to charge such high rates to many of their own borrowers.You know, there is money to be made by intermediating the weakness of the banking system at present - that's why some new banks are trying to come in and other banks are trying to expand. But the profits that have been made have been in large part partly the reflection of less competition as some banks have disappeared and foreign banks have withdrawn, but also very much simply the revaluation effects as mark to market affects
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009the valuation of assets on the balance sheet, and the unwinding of the losses that occurred in the run-up to that.Governor, on the Q3 GDP number, you seemed quite relaxed about that in your statement. Do you see that as a statistical anomaly? And on sterling - again - tacitly or benignly you seem to be welcoming the effect on the economy. What's the Bank's approach on sterling?On the first of those, no, I think the Q3 numbers speak for themselves. We have no reason to second-guess that. We say in the Report, as ever, that when looking at any official number for output, there is a Fan Chart around it to reflect the fact that the ONS do revise data as better information come along. There's no reason to suppose that the first estimate won't be revised - I'm sure at some point it will be. On average, we might expect that to be revised up slightly, but not by much, and it could go in either direction. So I certainly don't dismiss it at all.I think more to the point is that, if you look at the business surveys, then it seems to be the case that there is a story of weakness in the third quarter, but that's - after the summer period, into September and October - started to turn into greater strength. We saw a pick-up in the industrial production numbers in September, and I think as going into the fourth quarter, the Business Survey suggests a stronger picture. But we'll see.As I say, this is not a moment to get obsessed by whether the quarterly growth rate is +0.2 or -0.2. The big picture is that we've seen right across the industrialised world a very significant fall in the level of output. That's been stabilised. We're beginning to see slowly, gradually, some signs of picking up. The big picture is a very sharp fall in the level of output, and it will take a long time to recover that.
Sam Fleming, Daily Mail:Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009Could I ask about bank credit, please? You say in the Report that you expect bank credit to remain subdued for a protracted period of time. Could I ask in terms of that protracted period of time, to what extent does this suggest that quantitative easing, as some people have suggested, is simply not working? I take your point about the balance sheet investment that we need to see in the UK, but some people say - if quantitative easing were refocused towards, for example, purchases of private sector assets, that that would have a greater impact on the bank lending scene.No, I think there's a misunderstanding here between money on the one hand and credit on the other. They're not the same. Quantitative easing is designed to try and stimulate the demand side of the economy; I'll come back in a minute to private sector purchases. But the bulk of quantitative easing is designed to inject money directly into the economy. The people who receive money in exchange for the assets that we buy will then diversify their portfolios, and that will lead to a range of impacts on other asset prices of a wide range of financial assets that will stimulate both spending and lower the cost of company finance.So that's the broad mechanism, and that's to do with the demand side. The weakness of the banking sector is on the supply side - supply side of credit. And there are structural problems in the banking sector there because they are trying to deleverage their balance sheets, and that means there's a very strong incentive not to extend lending unless it appears highly profitable. And as I said, banks are finding it expensive to raise money themselves at this stage.That means that any monetary stimulus of whatever kind, whether conventional or unconventional, is likely to be facing a
Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009head wind in the form of the weakness in the banking sector. That doesn't mean to say that quantitative easing isn't working. It is. But it means that we've perhaps have had to do more than we would have done had the banking sector been working effectively, in order to try to stimulate demand in the economy.As far as private sector purchases are concerned, this was done with a different objective. We weren't trying to inject a certain amount of money into the economy; we were trying to take a limited number of steps in order to improve the functioning of certain private sector credit markets. And to that extent, that part of the operation was aimed at the supply side. We've picked out the markets that we think it's possible for a central bank to intervene in in a generic way, without making judgements about which companies or sectors of the economy merit support.We've put in place schemes which were consistent with the remit that the Chancellor asked the Bank to carry out in order to do this. We've put no limit at all on the size of these programmes; we're willing to buy whatever is offered to us, subject to the general terms that we say we will purchase assets at. And that's consistent with the remit give to us by the Chancellor.Now of course it would be possible for someone to say - well, buy lots of other private assets, in which case I think I would simply say - well, which assets and on what terms? And I think that, if it comes to buying private sector assets which discriminate among companies and among sectors of the economy - there may well be very good reasons for doing that. There is no good reason for the Central Bank to do that; that is a decision which ought to be taken by elected politicians because
Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009it's putting taxpayers' money at risk, and that is not something which the central Bank should aim to do.So that's a question which I think I would then put back to government. If there is a case - and the government obviously has introduced a number of schemes for intervening directly in private credit markets and making finance available. That's the role of government; the government's done that. If it wishes to do more, that's entirely a matter for government. We certainly would not stand in the way of that. But I don't think it's sensible for us to dream up new schemes that would involve making credit judgements between companies and sectors of the economy. That is a matter for government, not the Central Bank. Our schemes have worked actually rather effectively. As I say, we didn't aim to inject any particular amount of money at all, and I think we're very pleased by how successful the scheme has been, without the need to engage in massive purchases.Now it may well be that other factors have contributed to that. The corporate bond market picked up pretty well after we started our operations. That may well have been coincidental and the reflected worldwide conditions. Well it doesn't matter; the fact is - the end result is what matters, and it worked, and companies have been using the corporate bond market. The commercial paper market likewise picked up, and indeed some of the companies that were selling commercial paper to us in the early months of our scheme now feel quite happy and would rather sell their commercial paper on the private market. That's a sign of success, not failure.So I think we feel that the operations have actually worked in those areas where we feel they could have worked. And it's rather puzzling when people come up with all kinds of vague
Daisy McAndrew, ITV News:Mervyn King:Daisy McAndrew, ITV News:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009suggestions for other assets and schemes. I think they should spell out what those schemes are. But my belief is that they would make more sense to be carried out by government and not by the Central Bank.Could you tell us where you stand on the argument between those who at the moment say - the number one priority for policy makers should be cutting our huge national debt and protecting our credit rating amongst other things, and those who say - the war is not won; we're not out of danger, and policy makers like yourself should concentrate on continuing to stimulate the economy, perhaps with more money.Well, I don't think one has to make a choice. I think that fiscal policy clearly has to set a course which makes it credible that the deficit, which is very large, will be brought down. That will create market confidence that the UK is a country that is determined, despite the tremendous shocks and the need to increase public debt to deal with the banking problems, that we are a country committed gradually to bringing down our national debt to the levels - low levels which it had reached relative to GDP. We need to do that on the fiscal side, and at the same time monetary policy will be set in order to ensure as far as we can a balance between demand and supply by keeping inflation close to the target.Those two things are certainly not inconsistent with each other. We have to work together to ensure that we reach the right outcome in both respects.Were you surprised that Fitch seems to be warning today that we're in danger of losing our credit rating?
Mervyn King:David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009I don't think you should ever take the warnings of credit rating agencies absolutely at face value. I see no reason why they should do that. But nevertheless, it's up to governments to give a clear lead in setting out a clear and credible strategy. But we certainly have the capability of doing that.You've highlighted the prospect of a sharp rise in inflation in the short term. Are you saying that the MPC essentially will look through that short-term rise and not respond to it? I ask because there's a view in the markets that the QE process is coming to an end, that you've probably reached the end of that process with last week's decision. Are people wrong to conclude that?Well they're certainly wrong to conclude that we've decided that. We have made no judgement at all, and we have a completely open mind as to whether we would do more asset purchases or not. That is not something that we have decided, and our decision last week was not made as a sort of first step towards ending it; it was made as a right judgement in our view about what we needed to do, given the outlook for inflation.Yes, the Committee does intend to look through the short-term rise in inflation in exactly the same way as we did in 2007 and ultimately did in 2008, when inflation of course went to a much higher level than we would expect it to rise now. But I think it's important to make clear that we would expect - particularly with a reversal of the cut in VAT in January and petrol price inflation picking up, to see a rise in inflation over the next few months. That won't come as news to us; that's exactly what we expect.But then we expect it to fall back, and once that effect drops - it's a price level effect, remember - and that unfortunately stays in the index for 12 months, even though the effect comes through
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009in January. So once we get to the beginning of 2011, then you'd expect to see that the impact of the very large amount of spare capacity bearing down on inflation would come through, and the big picture from this forecast that we published today is that right through the next three years - apart from this short term rise in inflation - we'd expect to see the risks to inflation more on the downside relative to target than the upside.Now we've put in place a highly stimulative policy which we think towards the end of that period will bring inflation back to the target. But we will have to wait and see what happens. And there will be combinations of interest rates and asset purchase, decisions to be made on those combinations over the next two to three years that will guide our decisions and the path of inflation back to target.I wanted to ask about your decision taken at the last MPC meeting to slow down the pace of asset purchases and the ceiling is now 200. And it's a question about - where does this leave the government in the funds that it has to raise? Because even though I take the point that you've not taken a decision about what you're going to be doing in future as far as setting the ceiling of the asset purchase programme, there is nonetheless the prospect that we could be here in three months time and that you will have decided to pause. And so that would be in a circumstance where the government, with already very tightened finances and very tightened fiscal position, is still nonetheless going to be having to raise money in the bond market. And so what you're doing is - the government's now in this position where a big buyer of gilts is sort of withdrawing its purchases and shutting the window.And so I wondered if you've got any thought that the Bank maybe ought to continue these purchases a little bit while longer
Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009while the government does its work as far as straightening out its finances?No, the basis on which we make our decisions, both on Bank Rate and asset purchases, is entirely in order to meet the inflation target. And I think one should bear in mind that the idea that there may be some fiscal consolidation down the road is hardly news - it was in the Budget last spring. It's clearly been talked about much more in the last few months, so markets clearly expect that, and they must have some expectation about the path for our asset purchases, which is I think they don't believe will continue indefinitely.So in all these respects, you know, markets know that; they haven't pushed up bond yields yet, and one would expect them to take all that into account as we get nearer the time.But the fact that yields haven't risen now I think does, to my mind, hold out the prospect that it is possible to put in place a proper framework for fiscal consolidation, for us to pursue our monetary strategy without dramatic consequences for bond yields.But you know, time will tell. But I think it's not unreasonable to hope that we could do that. And our policy has to be based very clearly and firmly, I think, on the objective of meeting the inflation target, so that's what we shall continue doing.11.00: Armistice Day two minute silencePaul Mason, BBC Newsnight:	I just wanted to come back to the question that was raised at the beginning about - and I think it just haunts the prediction:throughout the report you've re-emphasised two conditions. One of them is the rising debt to GDP ratio reaching 12% in the
Mervyn King:Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009early part of the forecast; that is you don't factor in the fiscal tightening. And on top of that you do factor in that QE that lasts for the whole of the forecast period, and that's up to 2012 in this forecast.Just to be clear with the public, what this means is that we only get a recovery in 2011, back to the previous level of GDP, as long as a future government does not tighten fiscally, as long as a future government does not order you to withdraw the QE stimulus. That's correct, isn't it?No, I don't think it is correct because the conditioning assumption that public spending and effective tax rates will be as set out in the Budget in the spring of this year did imply some fiscal tightening through the next four or five years. And it was quite a considerable degree of fiscal tightening implied in those Budget projections. That is fully factored into this.In addition, in addition, we have factored in some downward pressure on consumer spending, reflecting our view that consumers are anticipating probably some further fiscal tightening, though of an uncertain magnitude and timing. So if there were to be announced in future fiscal tightening on a more ambitious scale than was announced in the spring, that would affect the forecast; but it's not true to say that any fiscal tightening from here on in is inconsistent with the recovery that we've got.And on the QE side, because David Cameron has indicated that he wants to withdraw the QE as fast as possible?Well, the decision about asset purchases is one for the Bank of England; that's a decision that we would make, and we would make it in terms of our judgements about what was necessary in
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009terms of monetary stimulus, both in terms of asset purchases and in terms of Bank Rate.So it's not for David Cameron to tell you whether or when you should withdraw monetary stimulus?Well, not unless the arrangements for monetary policy and independence of the Bank of England change, and that's up to parliament to decide. But given the current arrangements, then that's a matter that we decide.The Report suggests that there are differing views on the Committee about the prospects for inflation. It does seem that some of the tensions between different views is evident in the forecast and in the Report and what you've said today - but maybe you'll correct me. Taking all the very important caveats about the uncertainty of the forecasts going forward, which I know you will remind me of, just looking at the forecast that you have in the Fan Chart, it seems to be consistent with what you just said, which is that over the full next three years the risks to inflation are on the downside, not the upside. And yet - and you've also noted that inflation's going to be the forecast level throughout the next two years, or below the target level. But the Report says the risks are broadly balanced and that there are significant risks in each direction. Is there a tension there? ... Because looking at this chart, that does not seem to be consistent with "broadly balanced risks"?No, what the report says is that at the end of the three-year forecast horizon, the risks are broadly balanced. That's consistent with the chart - the risks are broadly balanced at that three-year horizon. But before then the risks are more on the downside. So what you've said is absolutely a correct
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Patrick Hosking, The Times:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009description; it's consistent with what I said, and it's consistent with what the Report said.But using the example at the dashed line ... still significantly below [inaudible].Well, this is, remember, a forecast conditioned on the particular path of the yield curve and for an assumed level of asset purchases. What we will actually do of course remains to be seen. This is just a particular view of the outlook. But the fact is that, at that three-year horizon, the Fan Cart condition on the market path and £200 billion worth of asset purchases, the risks are balanced at that three year horizon, which is the end of the forecast horizon.But I don't give that any particular weight. I mean, the big picture is that before that the risks are clearly more to the downside. But there is enormous uncertainty here. We've seen how volatile inflation can be. In the last year it's been as low as 1.1 and as high as 5.2. Now our job is to try and take a broad judgement of the risks facing the outlook, and to set policy accordingly with a medium term view. And that's what the Committee have tried to do.Can I just go back to that third quarter GDP figure? I know it was only one figure and it's provisional, but have you examined why you were wrong-footed by that figure? Are there particular reasons why? Is it possible there is something in the UK economy that makes it a special case and we will struggle to return to growth more than other economies? And have you changed your methodology or your sums going forward based on that hiccup?
Mervyn King:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009No we haven't and I really think it's wise not to place too much weight on this, you know, so called fuss about the third quarter figure. No one can easily judge whether recovery starts in one quarter rather than the next. The big picture is the same across most of the industrialised world – of a large fall in output, slowly and gradually coming back.Now in the UK we put most of the weight in the first estimate of GDP on the output figures. In the United States, for example, they put far more weight on the expenditure-based figures. We know that expenditure in the UK in the third quarter was probably higher, because of things like the scheme for promoting sales of new cars by handing in old cars. The figures of car registrations in the third quarter were dramatically up. But they may not have corresponded to higher output in the third quarter.I think from the industrial production figures you can see very clearly a depressed level in July and August and a pick-up in September. I don't think one should attach any great significance to any of this and I certainly don't think it's worth sort of rubbishing the ONS figures on the grounds that surely it can't possibly be true. I don't believe that; I think it could well be true, but that then recovery comes a bit later.The big picture, as I said, the sharp fall in the level of output of a very dramatic kind, followed by a slow, gradual recovery. And that's the big picture that we should hang onto here. I don’t see any evidence in this at all of differences between different advanced economies. The most important difference that you see in the world economy is not among the developed countries, it's between the advanced countries on the one hand and the emerging market countries on the other, where they do seem to have shown considerable signs of recovery which is a very
Sean O'Grady, The Independent:Mervyn King:Sean O'Grady, The Independent: William Keegan, The Observer:Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009fortunate outcome. And that's the big difference in the world economy, not differences between advanced economies.I think it is fair to say that the public are perhaps anxious that the recovery hasn't arrived as soon as might have been hoped, and how the authorities are working together to deliver that recovery. When was the last time you had a substantive conversation with the Prime Minister about the state and prospects for the British economy?Well I'm not going to comment on when I see the Prime Minister, but you know I have regular meetings with the Chancellor; that's the person I should be speaking to normally, he's the person devising the Pre-Budget Report. And I think - I mean at the weekend I spent a good deal of time with him.Thank you.A very quick one going back to what you said earlier, do I take it, Mr Governor, that you agree with the letter writer to the FT who said there's plenty of money around, but very little credit?Well you say there's plenty of money around; we have been trying to stimulate the growth of broad money. I think we would have preferred if the growth of broad money had picked up a bit sooner. But it is certainly the case that we feel that there are impairments in the credit mechanism in which the banking system provides credit to industry, which is why it is perfectly reasonable for people to ask about mechanisms by which savings can be channelled to investment through means other than the banking system.That is a medium term challenge; it would be nice to have a more resilient financial system in which we're less dependent on
Natasha Brereton, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009a small number of large banks that account for such a large proportion of credit extended to the private sector, particularly small and medium sized firms.Now one of the encouraging features of the last six months has been the extent to which, at least large, largish companies have been able to access equity markets and corporate bond markets to find an alternative to bank finance. That's been very encouraging. And that's given some support and help to smaller companies because it has relieved the pressure on the demand for bank finance, because these big companies have been able to go to the capital market.But I don't think our efforts should end there, I think there is a genuine medium term policy question about designing instruments which enable the flow of savings to be intermediated to investment. Now there's no shortage of savings in the economy at present; it's finding a mechanism through which they can be transferred to business investment.I wanted to ask how divergent the views are on the MPC regarding the extent to which the output gap will bear down on inflation in the medium term. And following on from that whether the Bank is in the process of doing any research on the permanent impacts on output from the recession and the financial crisis?Well on the first part, I can deal with it very simply, I don't think they're any bigger now than they normally are, there are always differences of views and judgements about some of these key issues. I mean you'd expect there would be. I'm sure there are differences among any nine of you chosen to form a committee. But what that means, you'll have to wait until the minutes appear
Charlie Bean:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009next week. That's when the views of the individual members of the committee are revealed in the minutes, but not today.On the question of estimates of the impact of the downturn on supply capacity, perhaps I can ask Charlie to comment on that.Well as the Report discusses at some length we do think that the downturn is likely to have a significant and relatively persistent impact on the supply capacity of the economy. That comes through a number of channels, through obviously the very sharp fall in investment we've seen - if investment stays low that will impact on the rate of growth of the capital stock of the economy. The interaction and the flow of working capital to business, particularly smaller business may affect the ability of companies to meet orders. And there are some signs that some companies may have been forced to turn orders away because they can't get the working capital to produce.Although today's unemployment numbers are in some ways heartening in that they suggest that the rate of increase may be levelling off, if unemployment does stay high for a sustained period that may result in impairment of the skills and human capital of the workforce.So there are a number of channels. Now in terms of the quantitative impact of all of those, it is very difficult to be certain of how big the effect will be. There is a certain amount of research that's been coming out of places like the International Monetary Fund recently looking at the impact of previous downturns on supply, in particular the most recent World Economic Outlook has quite a substantial chapter on this. The OECD have also been producing work. And they point to the lasting effects from downturns that are associated with banking crises. But there is a very high degree of heterogeneity in
Natasha Brereton, Dow Jones:Charlie Bean:Heather Stewart, The Observer:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009historical experience here, where some countries have ended up experiencing relatively little effect, others very large and long- lasting effects.I mean, our central view is that there will be a substantial effect here, but there is a great deal of uncertainty about that on either side.Can I just ask a very quick follow up question regarding the output gap again? I mean there was some concern voiced in the minutes, maybe a couple of months ago, that maybe the MPC had miscalculated the size of the output gap. Is that still a concern for you?Well I mean the output gap is not something we observe, that is one of the fundamental problems in carrying out macroeconomic policy; one has to try and estimate the degree of slack in the economy by looking at measures of capacity utilisation in firms, the level of unemployment, and so forth. I don't think there's anything that has happened which has led us to suggest our assessment of the margin of spare capacity in the past has been particularly wrong. The pick-up in inflation that we saw in the year or two running into the crisis was very heavily driven by commodity price developments rather than signs of domestic pressure pushing up domestically produced goods prices.So our assessment that the margin of spare capacity was pretty small, you know we were operating at roughly around about potential in the years leading up to the crisis, probably seems to us still a reasonable judgement.Sean's right, there is quite a lot of public concern about what's happening in the economy at the moment; people are desperate to try and understand it. And if we do get a positive figure in Q4,
Mervyn King:Paul Wallace, The Economist:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009we'll of course all write, you know - "It's official: Recession over". But it is - looking at Chart 2 that you made a point of drawing our attention to - is your message today to ordinary households and consumers and employees that actually we should expect it to be 2011 at the earliest before this starts to be anything like what feels a normal economy, you know, before the feel good factor returns do you think?It's going to be a long, hard path back to where we had expected to be. And I think it is very important not to - and you have a great responsibility here, if you treat growth of plus 0.2 as a sign of the bunting and great celebration and minus 0.2 for doom and gloom, I don't think you're giving a very accurate impression of what's going on.We have seen this enormous fall in output; people can see that, it's reflected in higher unemployment. And this isn't going to change quickly. Things we hope will gradually improve, but it will be a long, hard path back to the path that we might have expected to be on, had we not experienced such a dramatic financial crisis.Just following on from that, aren't you rather underplaying the increase in your projections for growth compared with August? I mean comparing the two in August you seemed to be having sort of GDP growth, the modal path being around 3% year on year towards the end of 2010. And it is now more or less up to 4% on the market interest expectations. And now, and in relation to that chart 5.7 - I'll make sure I'm in the right report, the November Report, if you just keep everything unchanged then you've got inflation above target, which wasn't the case - I can't remember precisely the case last time. But anyway, I mean, more focused on the growth really. It seems quite a big
Mervyn King:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009increase, but you've been constantly stressing it's a long path and it's rather sluggish?I don't think these things are - the point is this is completely compatible, in order to get back to where we would have been, you have to have very high growth rates in order to use up all the spare capacity that's been created. Now we have a more optimistic growth path in this projection than in August because there have been a number of contributory factors to that. The yield curve has fallen, so there's more monetary stimulus from interest rates.The amount of quantitative easing is bigger than we thought then; the exchange rate is lower - 4% lower - than it was in August and the world economy is stronger than we thought then. So those four factors all help to explain why it is that the forecast this time is for somewhat higher growth rates.Now in comparing it with other people, you should bear in mind that there are big downside risks. So this is - the single most likely path is the one that you've stressed. We don't like to stress any particular path, but if you were to look at the average growth rate in the forecast that would be around a percentage point lower, because there are significant downside risks. And that expected path is the one perhaps that's more useful to compare with others.Nevertheless, even if we get significant positive growth rates in the future, we have a long way to go to get back to what it would have been. That's why the big story is one I think that's told by the levels chart, Chart 2, as Heather described it. But it's not inconsistent with the path for output growth picking up at all, it's merely a measure of the amount of work that has to be done
Paul Wallace, The Economist:Mervyn King:Arisa Yoshida, Nikkei:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009over a period now to restore the damage that was done by the sharpness and severity of the financial crisis.Just to follow up on that. I mean if the economy is growing and - using your modal path, and I accept what you said about the sort of mean being lower - that is quite similar to the sort of bounce back we got after the '92 recession where we actually did have quite a long period of quite rapid growth following that.But I mean I would hope that you would expect us to put in place monetary conditions in order to generate a recovery. That is what we're trying to do. And I think what this forecast says is that we think that the accommodative monetary policy path that we've put in place will work. Nevertheless it will take time to get back to where we need to get, and there is a great deal of balance sheet adjustments on the way. It will be a bumpy road because balance sheet adjustments can't easily be anticipated perfectly. We can't be entirely sure what is the path of monetary stimulus, and the rate at which eventually we should withdraw that stimulus, to ensure that that path is smooth. But the use of monetary policy will make it smoother than it would otherwise have been.Let me ask about the limits of financial regulation. After crisis our regulators in the world are talking about, the high capital requirement, or a high liquidity requirement. But it seems to me that they are based on the idea that we are going to have good regulation in the future that will stop the big institutions failing. Do you think - what do you think about the limits to what regulation can do?And secondly I'd like to ask about the European Commissioner Neelie Kroes’ job. Banks like ING or RBS have to face serious
Mervyn King:David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009restructuring because of the pressure coming from the European Commission. So do you think she is doing a good job in terms of solving the Too Big To Fail Programme, as well as in terms of following the European Competition rule, thank you?Whist they are some very big and important questions that you've raised. I don't think with respect they are decisions that bear on the responsibilities of the Monetary Policy Committee which is the purpose of this press conference. So I think, if I may, I will put those to one side, and we can come back to them on another occasion. This is an occasion for discussing monetary policy. I'm very happy to admit there are limits on the powers of monetary policy makers. Let's not depress ourselves too much by talking about limits to everyone else as well. But there are certainly limits on what we can do.I just wondered if I could ask you about the balance sheet adjustment and rebalancing that you've talked about in the report and the extent to which that has to be borne by households? 'Cos I noticed that one or two committee members have said that household spending wasn't excessive or particularly out of line with historical experience in the run up to the crisis. And I think one committee member has said it was not clear that debt levels, household debt levels, were unsustainable before the crisis. And I notice on page 44, you say that it's quite conceivable that household spending could recover to its historic average after what seems to be a relatively short period of adjustment. What's your view on what - if you like - how much sacrifice households have to make, how much different their behaviour should be in the future compared with what it was in the past?Well I think I agree with the Report. There are a number issues here which we point to which could affect precautionary saving.
Spencer Dale:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009And I think one thing that has changed clearly is, irrespective of whether debt levels taken out in the past were appropriate - and I think the Committee felt broadly that they were explicable in terms of underlying economic conditions - now of course looking forward people may expect a rather different kind of world, and that may lead them to adjust both the amount of debt, but also the amount of savings that they want to hold. But let me ask Spencer to comment further on household balance sheets.Well I think, putting it into a broader context, there's a number of different factors pulling on consumption at the moment and in trying to work out - and our job is trying to work out how those different forces are going to balance out. As the Governor said, you'd expect households in a more uncertain environment, concerned about their job prospects, to be wanting to increase their levels of precautionary savings. And indeed we have seen quite a sharp rise in the savings ratio.Other factors which would also be acting to weigh down on consumption are the slowing that we've seen in current levels of income growth and also people's expectations of their future levels of income if they expect the weak levels of demand to persist.However, on the other side, the Report does highlight there has been some turnaround in household levels of consumer confidence about both their own incomes and also about the prospects for the economy. And also, as the Governor has also stressed, there's an extraordinary degree of monetary stimulus in the economy at the moment which is also helping to encourage consumers to continue their spending. And it's for that reason that the Report suggests that we may start to see some degree of stabilisation in consumption in the future.
Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Mervyn King:Paul Fisher:Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday: Paul Fisher:Female: Gonzalo Vina, Bloomberg:Mervyn King:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009Governor, can you quickly tell us to date how much dividend income the Bank has earned on its asset purchases, and what it plans to do with the money?Let me ask Mr Fisher who is the man who, if not has the keys to the vault, at least keeps all the paperwork.We have received substantial fees in terms of dividend payments on the corporate bonds of the order of several billion. People can actually work out from our bond holdings and the rates on each bond exactly what the number is, but it's not one we publish. And that money at the moment sits within the asset purchase facility fund.Sorry could I just ask, what will happen to it eventually?Well it's part of the fund and it will be unwound as we - and it will become part of the proceeds of the fund as we unwind the scheme in future years.And the final question?Governor, I just wanted to ask you about fiscal policy again, and to what extent do you agree with the Conservatives that monetary policy should do the heavy lifting going forward in supporting the economy? And another one if that's okay, I just wondered if you comment on the proposals made by the Prime Minister at the weekend on the Tobin tax and all the other mechanisms for getting banks to pay for some of the risks?Well I think I said what I wanted to say on fiscal policy, I've really got nothing more to add. I only ever set out the views on fiscal policy insofar as they reflect the likely path of the deficit and the implications that has for our ability to meet the inflation target.
Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009It's pretty clear what we need to do and monetary policy can respond to it. And I think it's always been the case, right through the last 12 years, that monetary policy and fiscal policy have worked pretty well. We know what fiscal policy is and we can respond to that. And I think the Government knows what our reaction function is likely to be. So they know how we're likely to respond. And there is always a Treasury representative in our meetings to hear what we say. So I think monetary and fiscal policy work together pretty well and that's all that needs to be said.On the second, I mean clearly ideas for a Tobin tax are old ideas; they go back a long way. The objective of the original proposal was to reduce volatility in financial markets. I think the debate now is about something rather different. The debate now is about - how can we affect the incentives which banks and other financial intermediaries have to take certain actions, and in particular to increase leverage and take on more risk than would be desirable?So I think what people are looking at in the international community is a debate about what instruments we could use to try to ensure that we don't end up with the sort of risk taking that we saw leading up to 2007. And in that context it's certainly true that people are looking at various taxes. But in the central banking community we tend to think of capital requirements as being a proxy for that because capital requirements, at least levied at differential rates on different kinds of assets, can mimic the effect of a differential tax on different kinds of activities.But in the end, as I said in my speech in Edinburgh, I think to rely on any one of these is perhaps putting too much weight on it. We need to have an approach based on three different areas where we look at. One is capital and capital requirements.
Jenny Scott: ENDPage 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th November 2009Another is resolution, the wills that I talked about in the Mansion House speech, and the resolution mechanism - which in America they're taking about as going well beyond the normal banking sector. And the third part which I talked about is structure. And I think to try and rest everything on any one of these three legs may be to put too much weight on it than it can easily bear.But there are issues which are very important, and it is in that context I think that people felt that perhaps the Tobin tax wasn't central to the debate that they were most interested in, which was looking at incentives to change the risky activity of banks, where this three legged approach, I think - capital and capital requirements; resolution and structure - all three of these are important and will need to be taken into account.Okay, thank you all very much for your time.