WORLD TELEVISIONBank of England Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Right at the end of your opening statement you said that further easing of monetary policy, including increasing the supply of money, might be warranted - or something like that. And you have a box on page 44/45 talking a little bit about that. Well I have to say that box is, if I may say, slightly waffly in its content. Because what people want to know - and because this might well happen before the next Inflation Report - they want to know what you're actually going to target to get inflation back to the medium term. Are you going to target the quantity of Central Bank reserves, the illiquidity premium in the market or the amount of lending? And could you just talk a bit about that -Yes of course. Well I'm sorry you think it's waffly. Let me try to make the following statements less waffly.The target is very clear - it's the inflation target, and it's pretty obvious from the projections here that the central projection with the risks to inflation broadly balanced, but very slightly on the downside, that it looks as if further action will be necessary.So the question is - what action should that be? Now we've spoken in the past - and many of you have been writing about the so-called unconventional measures. I think the point I want to stress is that there's nothing terribly unconventional about them. For many years central banks debated as to whether their short-run operating instrument should be the overnight interest rate in the market or whether it should be the monetary base. And central banks have always been buying assets in the market, usually government assets, in order to either target the overnight rate or the monetary base.We've been buying gilts every week for years in order to try to keep the overnight rate close to bank rate as set by the
Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Committee. What we now will be moving to is a world in which, again, we will be buying a range of assets, but certainly including gilts, in order to ensure that the supply of money, initially base money, but the impact is on the broader supply of money - that's what matters - in order to ensure that the supply of money will grow at an adequate rate to keep inflation at the target, and that normal rates of economic growth can resume.And that I think is the essence of the operations. Now we've already announced a variant of that, which I think is a more unconventional approach. I mean, what I've just described, which is central banks buying government assets in order to ensure that either the overnight rate or the monetary base are consistent with their target for inflation, those are very conventional activities and they've been going on for decades. And that's why I called these - in my speech recently - I called these activities conventional unconventional measures.The unconventional measures are the ones that we're about to put into action later this week, which is trying to unblock some of the rigidities in the credit markets which have arisen because the corporate paper market, commercial paper market, has dried up to a large extent; it was small anyway. And the corporate bonds now show very high illiquidity premium. And we think there is some genuine gain to be had by trying to operate in those markets. But those operations are not designed as such to increase the supply of money in the economy; they're designed to target particular problems in those credit markets.As a result I think we think these operations, which I call unconventional conventional measures, and the more conventional ones - buying gilts - are a natural partnership; they go together. And I would see us operating on both of them.
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009The point about operating in the credit markets is that the scale of the activity, namely the impact on the money supply, is not the main diagnostic test. It's what is happening to the illiquidity premia and whether we are able to ensure that there is a resurgence of primary issuance of those forms of borrowing by companies in the markets; whereas buying gilts is the conventional approach where the sheer size of it is designed to increase the supply of money.And I think that what's key about that is just to note that the problem we face at present is that the supply of money is not rising quickly enough. You know, for many decades we've had the opposite problem. The problem now is that the supply of money is growing too slowly. If you look at what's happening to broad money held by households or companies, that was growing at around 8% a year a year or so ago; now it's growing at around 1% a year. All the measures of money, credit, nominal spending, nominal GDP, we are facing the problem that the growth rates are too low, and we need to increase those growth rates.Now I hope that isn't too waffly, Chris, but let me give you a chance to come back with -The broad money target.We're not targeting - we're targeting inflation. But the means by which we hope to get inflation back is a combination of trying to unblock some of the rigidities in credit markets, but more generally for the Monetary Policy Committee activity in this area, to increase the supply of money in the economy as a whole, and for that to be effective it has to be the supply of broad money.
Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Over the past few months economists have been pointing towards a number of what they see as failures by the Bank of England - that you failed to prevent the biggest debt bubble in British history developing; that you failed with your forecasting - I mean in the inflation report in August last year the word recession wasn't even mentioned once. Now you're saying we're in one of the deepest recessions in recent history. That you failed also to identify the severity of the financial crisis and in the first few months we were talking a lot about moral hazard, rather than actually - while the entire financial system was really crumbling around us. In view of all of that, do you not think that - rather as the HBOS and RBS directors had to apologise yesterday, you ought to owe some kind of apology to the British public for what they're having to endure at the moment?Let me explain what we're doing, and we're going to focus on our actions. In the last five months we have cut Bank Rate from 5% to 1%. I said that the Monetary Policy Committee is now engaged in a discussion about extending that to other actions that will enable us to increase the supply of money. We are absolutely focused on that.But let me take you back to the point about forecasting. Forecasting can never be an exercise which says - we will get it exactly right. I have been saying to these press conferences - and if you've been coming to them for 18 years you'd know that - that forecasting is not about pretending that you can anticipate the future. It isn't. Shocks will come along that hit the domestic and world economies that no one can easily forecast. And I don't believe anybody forecast the precise sequence of events that followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers and led to this extraordinarily sharp downturn in the world economy.
Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Let me just show you a chart in the Inflation Report to try and make that point. It shows the forecast - page 19 - it shows the Consensus Forecast. That's sort of the average of forecasts about - Chart 2.2. And what it shows is that last September/October there was a very sharp change in most people's forecasts of what was going to happen to the world economy. That's a perfectly reasonable change of view, given the unexpected events that occurred. And that's precisely what the whole point of having a framework of an inflation target is about. It's pointless to pretend that you can forecast the future precisely, and I have been saying for years and years that we do not do so.I mean lots of people were saying - you know, back in August last year - that the recession had already started -Back in August I said to you - if you had been listening - that the central forecast that the Monetary Policy Committee published last August was for a decline in GDP in the United Kingdom in the third quarter. That was in our forecast.But you indicated that it was going to be a mild recession. You said you wouldn't be surprised if maybe there were a couple of quarters of negative growth -Indeed -That's very different from what we've got -No. And I did not - we have - as a Committee we have revised downwards our forecasts in a very similar way to those of the
Ed Conway, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009IMF, the Consensus Forecast and everyone else. Why? Because new information came along about how serious the world downturn was, and we responded to it. I think that was a perfectly sensible reaction.I don't want to monopolise this, but I mean you are the guardians of the British economy, so it's slightly different you’re changing your forecast - you actually could have done more about this -No, it's not. It is not sensible for anybody to pretend that they can forecast the future when unexpected events can occur. We have been saying that as the absolute hallmark of our policy approach for years. And indeed we have been very clear, when appearing before Treasury Committee or in these press conferences; we do not pretend to know what the future holds in all respects. We can talk about balance of risks. We cannot know what the future holds. And there is no point basing policy on that false premise. Nobody dealing with an uncertain future is ever going to be successful if they go around pretending to themselves or others that they know what the future holds. No one can.What is important is to have a framework whereby you react when you see events emerging. And since last autumn we have reacted in a strong and vigorous way. We've cut Bank Rate from 5% to 1% in five months, and we're now preparing for further actions. The government's introduced two plans for dealing with the banking sector - we're part of that.Fiscal policy has been eased. Other countries too have responded. And I think one of the things that is different now from many previous episodes of serious world downturns is that
Sean O'Grady, The Independent:Mervyn King:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009across many countries governments have recognised that things have changed and have responded. Those policy changes have not yet had time to feed through. The cut in Bank Rate, the consequences of easing of fiscal policy, we hope the consequences of the banking packages to restore confidence in the banking system - all of this will have an effect in the future, but it certainly hasn't had an effect yet in the data.But you shouldn't ignore the fact that a reasonable view would be that policy stimulus will have some impact. That I think is important when forming a judgement about the balance of risks.The GDP projection - I don't know whether you'd call it a forecast or not after that - appears to show a very sharp recovery in the economy. Given the burden of debt that the household sector and the public sector are going to have to be paying over the next few years, why are you so confident that it's going to be such a bounce back?Well I think the point of the forecast is - and to follow on my previous comment - we're not confident. After all, that's why this is shown as a Fan Chart, not as a number. And that's a fundamental difference between the way we present forecasts and many other people do.So look at the Fan Chart. The first part to notice is that this downturn is probably somewhat sharper than most other forecasts at present. The second is that the risks are very heavily skewed to the downside. Perhaps I could just take you for a moment to a chart at the end of the Report, on page 39, which shows the probabilities of different ranges for output growth over the next year. And I think you can see from that that the risks are very heavily skewed to the downside. They're
Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009there precisely for the reasons that you gave, but also because we can't be confident that over the next year the measures taken by governments around the world will actually improve the ability of the banking system internationally to lend, or indeed that there may not be further measures of a protectionist nature that will damage world trade even more. And it's very disturbing how rapidly world trade is contracting.So I think you can see where we feel the balance of risks lies there, and that's a key part of the forecast. So when thinking about comparison of forecasts, I think it's very important to distinguish, especially on this occasion when the risks are so heavily skewed to the downside, between the single most likely outcome - which is at the centre of the darkest blue band in this Fan Chart - and the average of all the possibilities in the Fan Chart - the mean, the average of outcomes, which is quite a bit lower than that.The reason for the pick-up afterwards I think is a combination of two or three factors which are important. One is that the Committee does put weight on the fact that the stimulus to the economy will come through at some point. And that stimulus is not just the policy stimulus of monetary policy, fiscal policy and the packages to restore health to the banking system - which themselves are a very substantial stimulus - but also the fall in oil prices which has certainly mitigated the impact on real incomes in what might otherwise have been a very sharp downturn. And in addition the sharp fall in the exchange rate - more that a quarter in the past 18 months - single biggest fall in that sort of period since the Bretton Woods system of exchange rates came to an end.That too is going to provide some sort of stimulus by way of expenditure switching towards domestically produced output.
Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009That's one reason why the Committee feels that this is a reasonable view of the outlook. But the Committee is always drawing to your attention that this is a Fan Chart where many outcomes are possible, and the risks are clearly on the downside.The other aspect of the shape of the downturn which I think is relevant for our view is that we attach some weight to the idea that domestic output is being cut faster now than domestic demand, final domestic demand. In other words, that companies have seen that demand has fallen; they are cutting production sharply in the fist half of 2009; they'll be meeting some part of final demand from stocks; and then, since stocks can't continue to fall indefinitely, at some point there'll be a recovery in production, even if final demand remains weak.If you like it's the more modest example of the extreme case of what you could call the Honda effect; that is, you stop production altogether for a period but you still keep selling out of stocks. But then you have to resume production - maybe at a lower rate, but you resume production - and that itself will guarantee some pick-up in the rate of growth of output. So there's an element of stocks in this picture too which will generate some recovery.And the final point I think that is very important in thinking about the shape of this is that, when we come through this downturn, the balance of demand in the economy will have to look really rather different to the way it has looked for some years. So there has to be a rebalancing, in which there will be less consumption and more net trade and investment. And the prices in the economy are shifting in such a way as to bring that about over the next two to three years.
Gary Duncan, The Times:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009So a big impact from the stimulus, not just from policy, but from commodity prices and the exchange rate. An element due to the stockpiling component of weaker production now coming back later on, and the change in the pattern of demand over the next few years as we come out of the downturn into recovery. Those I think are the key elements in the Committee's views which are encapsulated in this Fan Chart.Thanks. Good morning, Governor. I just wanted to really follow up on that and continue to look at the future rather than go over the past. First of all you mentioned the downside risks set out in the Fan Chart for the growth projection. But given that this crisis hasn't lost its sort of capacity to surprise, and also given that the Bank has substantially been forced to downgrade its forecast this time and on previous occasions as a consequence of those shocks hitting the economy, shouldn't the Committee be moving to a mode where perhaps it embraces a bigger range of risks in the Fan Chart and accepts that the downside risks are even greater than those shown here. And in that context, the Committee's focused a lot on policy stimulus, and you've just set out the different aspects of that policy stimulus, which are also set out in the Report on page 20. But is that policy stimulus really as great as the MPC is suggesting, given, for example, mortgage lending remains very constrained; you referred yourself to the very high level of corporate bond yields; credit spreads remain far above normal; and also the monetary base - which had expanded by 40% in the final quarter of last year - has now fallen back to the levels it was at prior to that, partly as a result of the three month repos you did in October expiring.Given all of those factors, is the Committee perhaps a little bit too comfortable with the view that it's put in place this big policy stimulus, and shouldn't it be moving faster?
Mervyn King:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009And finally, if I may, in that context also, you're putting quite a lot of weight on the big policy stimulus in other economies, but if we saw the reception to Mr Geithner's proposals yesterday, the financial markets seemed pretty sceptical that other governments and other authorities are moving fast enough and aggressively enough to tackle what really is quite a profound crisis.Well I think the points you make about the current stance of credit markets is perfectly fair, but of course they don't reflect the fact that the policy action we've taken takes time to come through. It's always a question of, you know, nine, 12, 18 months before the impact of the policy easing will come through. So I don't think we've seen the impact of the stimulus in any of the current conditions.Clearly the banking package, the five-point plan that I mentioned earlier, will have to work in order to be able to ease those credit and borrowing conditions, and I believe that package, if implemented effectively, will eventually work. And I believe it's very similar to the principles of the US package, and clearly governments around the world are struggling to put in place quickly effective mechanisms for restoring the health of their banking systems. It's a complex process.But I think it's undeniable that they're working hard to achieve that. I mean, clearly the US government has announced a potentially very large package aimed at stimulating a restoration of health in the banking sector, and one way or another they will find a way of doing that - I'm confident of it. The issue is how long it will take, but we will get there eventually. And that's very different I think from the experience in, say, the 1930s, where
Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009the health of the banking sector was allowed to deteriorate for very much longer.So, yes, people are very conscious of the need to do something about the banking sector, and that's being done. But it will take time.In terms of speed, well we've cut Bank Rate as I said, but from 5% to 1% in 5 months, I'd defy you to find many examples of you know speedy action on Bank Rate either in other countries or in our own history. And I've make quite clear that the Monetary Policy Committee is now moving forward to using a wider range of policy actions, which will stimulate the growth of broader money in the economy.And we are quite determined, we recognise - it is very clear if you look at what's happened in nominal demand which was growing, any measure of nominal demand, final demand, expenditure or nominal GDP which was growing at around 6% a year, is now growing at around 0 to 1% a year - nominal GDP actually slightly negative. That's too low. And our task is to make sure that we increase the supply of money in the economy to bring those growth rates back to levels consistent with meeting the inflation target and ensuring that in due course normal growth can resume. And we have the ability to do that.It will take time. The fact that it hasn't happened already is no reason to suppose that either we can't do it, or that it won't work looking ahead and we are committed to ensuring that that happens. And what I'm struck by is that most of the governments in the rest of the world and most of the central banks that I deal with have exactly the same view. And I think that common purpose is what eventually will see us through this.
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Governor, I wanted to ask about your planned asset purchases that are going to be starting this week. It's two questions; the first is - as you start looking at buying corporate credit I wondered if you could provide some clarification about your assessment of the liquidity risk that you're looking at versus the credit risk? Because it's a push to buy corporate credit at a time when we're in a very nasty downturn and default rates are really set to start rising quite substantially. So how confident are you that the assets that the bank will be buying are going to be well chosen enough and reflect enough - the risks of liquidity versus credit?Secondly, as you do start taking these unconventional measures could you provide some clarification as to who exactly is in charge of the entire operation, it is yourselves, is the government? If it's not yourselves then what assurances do we have that independence of The Bank is protected?Well let me try and take the second one and then I'll make a brief comment on the first and then since the arrangement is one in which Paul Tucker the Markets Director and Spencer Dale the Monetary Analysis Director will make a joint recommendation to the Governors on this let me ask Paul perhaps to comment.Let me start with the governance of this. I think it's absolutely crystal clear. The operation that we're conducting this week is not an operation to deal with monetary policy as such; it's an operation to deal with particular blockages in credit markets. It's a facility that will be financed by the issue of treasury bills and all the risk is being taken by the government. So in essence we're acting as agents.
Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009But the government has asked us to form a judgement about what to buy, because it respects our judgement about the nature of the credit market interventions that make sense. But the risk is entirely with the government. So it's perfectly reasonable for the government to want to assure itself that the set of assets that we would be intervening in and the set of markets is consistent with its view about the risk it's willing to take and then the size of the operation is consistent with the amount of treasury bills it's prepared to issue to fund such an operation.It said that it has given authority to the Bank, the Executive to go up to £50 billion. And the mechanism by which that governance will work is that the two directors involved currently, Paul Tucker and Spencer Dale will make recommendations and the Governors will consider it and in consultation with the two Deputy Governors they will make the decision as to which actual purchases we carry out. So a very clear internal governance framework for the specific operations of credit easing financed by treasury bills.If we were to get to a point and we may well when the Monetary Policy Committee feels that it would like to create Central Bank money to finance purchases of assets, whether it's gilts or whether it's further credit easing operations then a resolution will be put to the Monetary Policy Committee after a discussion and the Monetary Policy Committee would vote on the operations it wanted to carry out. And it would then delegate to the Executive as now the actual authority to carry out the operations itself to deliver that impact. And the minutes would come out at the normal time and would reveal what the Monetary Policy Committee had decided to do.Now all that would be within a remit in which the Chancellor would first of all say that he would authorise these operations.
Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009He would have to say if they were to be effective that his remit to the Debt Management Office was consistent with allowing the Monetary Policy Committee to make its operation effective. And he would give some overall ceiling to the extent of those operations. But the Bank could always go back and request that that ceiling be changed.But the decisions on those operations would be as now made entirely by the Bank of England and it would be just as independent as it is now.The only thing in my view that changes materially is that when you are considering operations to buy securities, to influence the amount of money in the economy and particularly the amount of money which you are using to finance the purchase of government securities, it is of course inevitable that the government has to ensure that no other arm of government, in this case the Debt Management Office is actually - offsetting transactions, because otherwise it will simply offset what we were doing.This is a long standing debate. If you go back to the 1970s and '80s, there are some here I think - I won't identify them, who can remember the debates in that period. Debates about under funding in these circumstances were fairly common. And this is very much the same kind of debate.But it's clear the Central Bank has to work in a way that the Debt Management Office, or the funding operations of government are not working at cross purposes, they have to work together. That is the only difference I can think of. But there is certainly no compromise at all of the operations of the independent Central Bank. And we will be just as independent as the Federal Reserve.
Jennifer Ryan, Bloomberg News:Mervyn King:Inaudible comment Mervyn King: Paul Tucker:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009I have a little follow up to that and then another question. But just on this question of the Debt Management Office.I would like Paul to comment on how we will carry out - because you asked about the credit ratings of the instruments that we would buy.It's the spilt; yeah it's the split.Three things, first of all as you know credit it traded separately in the credit default swap market from a total corporate bond, which embodies liquidity risk and credit risk. And while credit spreads are remarkably high because of the economic downturn the spread between credit default swap spreads and corporate bond spreads on precisely the same underlying company risks is at record highs. So this liquidity premium is affectively identifiable approximately out there in the market and it is very large.The second thing, if you turn to page 14, chart 1.9, not using those kinds of measure at all, just taking corporate bond spreads and a model developed in the monetary analysis and financial stability parts of the Bank of England and do a decomposition, you again find that yes the default part of the spread has gone up a lot but also the liquidity part of the spread has gone up a lot.And thirdly, it makes common sense. If you go and talk to people they say that one of the significant things about buying a
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009corporate bond is you actually have to hand over a load of cash. And cash is quite short at the moment.While I've got the microphone would it be permissible just to come back to one tiny point that Gary made? Which is that you said that the monetary base had come down because the scale of the banks long term repos had declined.That's not right. The banks choose the level of reserves they want to hold with us and they have chosen to hold less with us during the course of this year very slightly. And that part of the monetary base is completely independent from the size and frequency of our long term repos which in fact have continued to be held once a fortnight.I'll just do a very quick follow up on the Debt Management Office and then ask a broad question. You mentioned that it would be important going forward if you moved into this conventional unconventional phase that the Debt Management Office is working in unison with any actions you take. Obviously at the moment the incentives for the Debt Management Office with the interest rates on government bonds being so attractive at the moment and the government facing very large amounts of funding needs in the future would be for the Debt Management Office to undertake quite a lot of funding.Now do you think there's a risk even now that their actions are going to be at odds with what you're trying to do to yield and your operations in the market?No, I don't, I think what matters is that they don't consciously offset what we do and take advantage of our operations to do something that they might not otherwise have done. Because
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders,Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009that would clearly be to undo what we did. As long as they don't undo our purchases then there is no problem.But I don't think there is any evidence that the scale of operations at present is either leading to significantly higher rates or problems in funding. And that's not surprising given the strength of the downturn and the position that we're in. And it goes back to the point that I made in my recent speech, which is almost everything that we are doing in the very short term looks as if it's diametrically opposite to what we want to do in the medium and longer term.And it is. And that's the paradox of policy which matches the Keynesian paradox of thrift, which is in these circumstances. Although in the longer term we will need to consolidate the public finances and reduce the scale of issuance of public debt, in the short term to prevent the downturn from being even greater than it is we need to transfer some of the private debt onto the public sector balance sheet.And although in the long run the national saving rate will need to go up, in the short term if it were to rise now we'd be in an even deeper recession. That's the paradox of policy; we are doing things that we will not want to do in the medium term precisely in order to dampen the strength of the recession.But you don't mention under funding in your chart on page 44 - in your box on 44/45?Because it's language which goes back to the '70s and '80s and for the cognoscenti they will know what I mean.
BBC:Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Would you consider that to be one of the tools, one of the potential tools, or is that more a tool of the government in context to it?Well I think what we're doing in terms of our buying government gilt is to reduce the net purchases which the private sector have to make of those instruments. And that is the essence of under funding. So provided the Debt Management Office keeps its sales of gilt the same, if we then buy them and create Central Bank money that will reduce the size of purchases that will have to be made by the non-bank private sector.And you know these are not terribly new - these are old debates, old instruments, there's nothing new or as I said terribly unconventional about them. That's why they are conventional, unconventional measures.Actually to go to your paradox of thrift. A lot of savers do feel they're being punished by interest rate cuts which do not seem to have helped the economy, what's your response to that?We I have an immense sympathy for them because the savers are clearly the one group that did not cause any of the problems that we are now facing. But given that we are in such a deep recession in the short run, I think that if we were not to take measures to stimulate the economy then the savers would actually find they were much worse off. They would be even higher unemployment and even more of a downturn in the economy.That's why it is the paradox of policy that we are doing things to stimulate spending now when you could argue that the imbalances of the economy, that are one of the underlying
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009driving forces reflecting a low national saving rate. And these are international imbalances, that's the fundamental driver of them.I have every sympathy with savers they are certainly not responsible for the current difficulties. But what I would say to them is this, that if we were to pretend - suppose we were to put up interest rates that might benefit savers in the short run. But is anyone seriously suggesting that if we were to raise interest rates now that would help the British economy get through the recession? No, what we have to do at present is to take actions to increase the supply of money in the economy, to increase spending in the short run in order to dampen the strength of this downturn.Can I ask you a little bit more about unconventional monetary policy and the sequence that might take you from credit easing to quantitative easing? Firstly does Bank Rate have to be at zero or close to zero before that happens? And secondly the box appears to suggest that you'd first see how the asset purchase facility works and then maybe use that as the basis for proceeding with the quantitative easing, is that the sequence, that you've give it two or three months to see how it works?No, I'm not sure that it is. I don't think it is. I think the answer to the first question is no, Bank Rate doesn't have to go to zero and there's a choice as to where it is. But I think we're getting now to the range where you know it doesn't make a great deal of difference where it is. So I think we are at the point where we need to think about this wider set of actions.In the context of those actions, I think that when we get to the point where the Monetary Policy Committee would take a
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009judgement on it, it would certainly want to continue the actions to ease blockages in credit markets, where the credit easing actions will continue. But it will surely also take a view on the extent to which it made sense to try to increase the supply of money in the economy. And that's when what it might do is to say, well look you know how much money do we think it's sensible to use to do the credit easing operations and then do more in terms of buying gilts to bring the total intervention up to what looks like a sensible number to increase the supply of money.I think that's the broad way in which the Committee is likely to think about it, but we'll have to wait and see how the Committee thinks about it. But I don't think you should think of this as a sequence where we have to spend several months trying this instrument in trying to unblock credit markets before we would turn to the conventional unconventional measures.So you're saying you're pretty well there now?Well we haven't done it and the Committee hasn't made a decision, so I can't tell you the Committee has made that decision. But it clearly is something which the forecast implies that we're going to want to discuss very seriously and we'll come back to that at our next meeting. In the meantime, it makes sense to make sure that we've got all the arrangements in place so that we could do it.Can I just come back to Ed's point and whether you should have been able to spot what was about to happen. But it is really good enough to say that the Bank was unaware that this huge shock was about to come and befall the economy? Isn't that
Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009rather like the French General in 1940 saying we expected the Germans to attack the Maginot Line but actually it came as a complete shock when they came through the Ardennes. You are paid aren't you to actually spot these shocks coming?I'm not paid to forecast the future - and I have always claimed that I would not accept that responsibility. What we did was ...Hang on a minute can I finish ... Well ask one question Larry and I'll answer it.And the idea that it did come as a complete surely is not actually borne out by what had been happening to the economy in the 12 months ahead of August 2008 when you were still at that point discussing whether an increase in interest rates was actually required. Unemployment had been going up, the rate of growth of the economy had been slowing down fast, banks had been falling over like ninepins - the financial system was already gummed up by that point.Isn't the reality that you got Monetary Policy consistently and for many people ruinously wrong during that period? And the real question is why did you get it wrong? Is it because your remit is wrong? It is because your model is wrong? Or is it because your judgement is wrong? Surely you have got some explanation for that.Well I don't accept the premise of the question at all and I'll give you one reason why. For ten years we hit the inflation target very accurately. So whatever we did in policy over ten years
Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009turned out to be the right thing and you and many others agreed with that proposition.During the course of 2008 the economy did slow, we said the economy needed to slow. We didn't say interest rates should rise because we think the economy was growing too rapidly. We said the economy needed to slow. And we were very deliberate about that. And at the August Inflation Report Press Conference, only two press conferences ago a number of people in this audience said, have you not lost credibility because inflation is too high and it's going to rise to over 5%? Those were the questions that were put.They were not unreasonable questions; inflation did rise to over 5%. And we said then, last year that the interest rate policy that we pursued - we did cut interest rates several times at the end of 2007 and the beginning of 2008. We called a halt to that process of cutting interest rates when inflation picked up very rapidly, more rapidly than it had for almost 20 years. We were conscious of the risks that there were on the inflation - the inflationary risks on the upside and it was not unreasonable to take into account those risks. I think that was a perfectly sensible thing to do.When the world economy changed, after the events of Lehman Brothers - and I think the point to make here is that it wasn't the failure of Lehman's as such, it was the complete collapse of confidence in the financial system around the world that followed the failure of Lehman, which I don't think was inevitable. It could have been a sequence of events where confidence did not collapse in such a precipitous way.But if you look at the downturn and indicators, the collapse of car sales in Brazil, the collapse of steel sales in India, around
Facilitator:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Facilitator:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009the world in October and November there was a quite extraordinary and synchronised collapse of confidence which has led world trade to collapse by 10% in the final quarter of last year. That was not something which I think it was reasonable to have anticipated for the first half of 2008.It has happened, it's very serious and we are responding. And as I said we've responded in a pretty strong way. We've cut Bank Rate from 5% to 1%. We're moving towards a wider range of actions. There have been these two packages of measures to deal with the banking system.So I don't accept the premise of your question. Sorry we're running out of time.Can I just ask one follow up? We want to give everyone to ask a question.Just one follow up please. You mention that - this is a question really about the structure of the MPC and the way it works, you mentioned that the system worked well in its first 10 years. It's going back to my Maginot Line analogy. Isn’t that a bit like saying the system works well in peacetime but not well in wartime? And do you think there needs to be any changes to the way the MPC operates so that it does actually perform more robustly when times get really tough?No, but what I have said, and I've made it very clear in a speech that I gave recently which I commend to you again if you haven’t read it, I said very clearly that Bank Rate as one instrument,
Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009irrespective of who sets interest rates or what the target is, is not a question of the MPC or inflation targeting. Bank Rate is only one instrument. And if you want to use that one instrument both to try to maintain a balance between demand and supply in the economy, and to prevent a rapid build up in the size of the financial sector; you can only do it by compromising on one of those two objectives.What makes much more sense is to think of a new set of instruments that could be used to deal with excessive growth and the size of the balance sheet of the financial sector. That to my mind is the big lesson of the last 10 years. It's not that Bank Rate was set at inappropriate levels because to accept that proposition would have to mean that you would have preferred higher unemployment and lower inflation in order to slow down the growth of the financial sector.It would have been better, since we did hit the inflation target and we did have reasonable growth in the economy, to have used a different set of instruments to control the rate of expansion of the financial sector. That I fully accept.But that is something which is a range of instruments which are called macro-prudential in the current debate, that no authority either regulatory or Central Bank had, either here or anywhere else in the world. And that is something which actually is a big area of debate which is being debated now in speeches, not just here but in the Basel Committee and indeed in almost any forum you go to. That's the big lesson.I'm not pretending that everything worked well, it clearly didn’t. But the lesson from it is not that you should stick to having one instrument and try to compromise that. Why should you accept high unemployment as the price of slowing the growth of the
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009financial sector? That has to be the implication of arguing that we should give up on inflation targeting.What we need to do is develop a new range of instruments. I don’t pretend for a minute that's going to be easy, it won't be. But I think the cost of not doing that has been shown and that's the big lesson to be extremely high.Governor. The IMF has said that the British economy is going to do the worst out of all the major economies. It does suggest in tying into your previous answer that some of the tools that could have been deployed such as was deployed in Spain, dynamic provisioning, could have been deployed here. And was there something wrong with your remit that has resulted in Britain doing the worst?No I don’t think that is relevant at all. There is incompleteness in the framework. I've been very clear about that in speeches before. We need new policy instruments. But if you think that having dynamic provisioning is sufficient then just look at what's happening in Spain now, it clearly isn’t. And if you look at the numbers that came out this morning on the industrial production in France and Italy their falls are bigger than those in the UK.I don’t know what the ultimate ranking of falls in GDP growth will turn out to be, I'm not sure that's a terribly interesting question. GDP is falling significantly everywhere and what matters is that all countries take the relevant policy actions to try to offset what is becoming a very serious world downturn. And no one country can do that itself, it has to be action taken in all countries and I would hope myself, a greater degree of international cooperation.
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Paul Wallace,Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009I mean ahead of the G20, we're hearing a lot about rebalancing the British economy. That's a very technical term. Can you just explain what policy actions a government or a future government would take to rebalance the British economy tangibly?Well rebalancing inevitably has an international aspect because if you're thinking about the balance within the British economy between domestic demand and net trade, that invariably is talking about the appropriate trade deficit which the UK has had. Now I have been giving speeches for years and years, right since the beginning of the MPC, about the need for rebalancing. But that is not something with the UK can easily achieve on its own. It is about rebalancing in the international economy.Economists have talked for a long time about the need for rebalancing. I think now people will have to take seriously the need to develop some reforms of the international monetary and financial system to make it possible to achieve the objective that was laid down at Bretton Woods very clearly. Keynes talked about; he said the weakness in the system that's been devised is that there are not symmetric obligations on surplus countries and on deficit countries. The obligations fall on deficit countries.And that's still a problem today. And until we can devise the system where there are obligations on surplus countries we will continue to see these international imbalances arise. They'll be for different countries and different time periods but there is a weakness, a fault line in the system and we've been arguing that for a very long time. But it requires a cooperative approach to change it.
The Economist:Mervyn King:Page 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Could I perhaps ask you to just explain again how we get from credit easing to quantitative easing in relation to the facility that's been set up? Would this be separate from the use of this facility, because you said you'd be purchasing gilts? Or would it be - because when the facility was announced by the Chancellor he said and he indicated that this could be used as a programme or a framework for monetary policy.And can I just ask a second question which is about the impairment of monetary policy. Clearly you said - you expressed your sympathy for savers but given the fact that only half of borrowers, mortgage borrowers are on variable rates, doesn’t this tend to imply that actually the impact certainly of the declines in Bank Rate have been very much diminished certainly in terms of cash flow effects.Well let me take that last one, and then you can remind me of what the first question was. On the last one I mean clearly we're getting to the point where the efficiency of further cuts in Bank Rate has diminished. I think there's no doubt that we're at levels now where the monetary policy transmission mechanism is somewhat impaired.It's not wholly impaired, there are still effects - there are still cash flow effects of cuts in interest rates, there are still effects through the exchange rate that operate. But there is no doubt it is somewhat impaired and the closer you get to zero the more that's likely to be true which is partly why you don’t have to go to zero before considering that it may be worthwhile moving into these broader set of operations.On the first part of the question, remind me again what was the specific point you wanted to...
Paul Wallace, The Economist:Mervyn King:Paul Wallace, The Economist:Mervyn King:Page 30 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Well my understanding, whether rightly or wrongly,... How you'd get from one to the other.The facility would be used for quantitative purposes and that it struck me from your answer to David Smith that it would be in some way separate. Because after all you are setting this up as a subsidiary and it's going to be financed by treasury bills initially in the first ...I think the nature of the operations would be very similar and it would still be in a subsidiary. And the operations would differ I think in two respects from the operations that we will be making up and running later this week. The current operations are limited to purchases of assets designed to ease credit blockages. So that if we were to go to a wider set of operations the range of assets would be extended and the obvious and the natural extension is to enable the MPC to buy gilt.But the most important difference is not that. The most important difference is that at present, as we operate as an agent of the government we would be buying assets in credit markets, financed by the issue of treasury bills. So it's not a monetary operation. And that's the operation we've put in place. If we were to go into the wider operations the MPC could decide that it wished to conduct such operations financed by the creation of Central Bank money. And that would be the real difference and that would be a decision to be taken by the MPC.But as I said the framework of actually using some of that money to buy assets to unblock credit markets would also be a very sensible thing to do, but it may want to do something in
William Keegan, The Observer:Mervyn King:Page 31 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009order to increase the supply of money overall by an appropriate amount to top that up by actually making potentially significant purchases of gilts. But the MPC will be making that decision because it will be a decision about the creation of Central Bank money.Short of that the government has authorised the Bank of England to purchase assets through the Asset Purchase Facility to ease blockages in credit markets financed by the issue of treasury bills. And that doesn’t create money.Mr Governor. You've emphasised the seriousness of the present situation and you've emphasised that you can't foretell the future. But you've also put quite a lot of very elusive emphasis on the measures that have been taken regards ways which might see a way out. Do you want to take the opportunity, at a time when the managing director of the IMF has used the word depression, the Prime Minister has and the Schools Secretary has given the impression that he thinks we're in for a very long haul. And given that there's so much confidence, trust and psychology involved, do you want to take the opportunity to cheer people up?Well let me try to cheer them up in the following sense. I don’t want to pretend that - it would be foolish to pretend that the current situation is other than serious; people can see it's serious. Output is falling; we are in, as I said, a deep recession. But the reason I would like to cheer people up is to say we have a policy framework which is capable in due course of getting us out of this. And those measures will work.Monetary - you don't have to worry about models; I'm not the slightest bit interested in these fancy models. What I am
Natasha Brereton, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 32 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009interested in is understanding monetary economics and financial history. And monetary economics and financial history will say that if the Central Bank creates a sufficient supply of money it can bring inflation back to the target and it can bring output back to a period when it can resume at normal growth.What it can't do is to do it overnight and there have to be some adjustments in the economy, a necessary rebalancing of the economy which inevitably will take some time, and is something which we can't and shouldn’t avoid.So we have to go through a difficult restructuring process, but we will come through it and we will get back to a position where we will have normal growth again and where no doubt at one of these press conferences in the future, I will be getting questions yet again about the credibility of the MPC in not stopping inflation from rising too high. But that's not today's problem. Today's problem is to ensure that spending in the economy will grow quickly enough to get us out of this recession and back to a more normal period. And we will do that.Just following up on the issue of the moving from credit easing to quantitative easing and trying to like clarify the kind of timing and sequence of that. Are we - I mean timing-wise what are we looking at for that and would anything have to change in the economic conditions for the Bank to do that or are we definitely on a course to go to quantitative easing, I just wanted to clarify that. Also looking further ahead if the idea of increasing the broad money supply doesn’t work, is there anything else the Bank could do?Well I said just now that if you increase the supply of money enough then you will be able to bring inflation back to the target
Natasha Brereton, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Natasha Brereton,Page 33 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009and ensure that in due course, though I can't predict for how long it will take, we will get back to normal growth. So this will work eventually.In terms of timing I think I've said that the programme operated on behalf of the government to unblock credit markets, that facility will be open for business at the end of this week, another couple of days. And that the projections we publish today make it pretty clear that some further monetary easing will be needed and therefore I would expect that before very long the Monetary Policy Committee will consider seriously those actions. But that's for the Committee to decide and it meets again at the beginning of March.Just going back to the point about the increasing the money supply, I mean you warn in the report that there is a risk of banks forwarding liquidity. Now if that happens then you know how ever much you increase the broad money supply it's...Well certainly if the banking system is in as bad a state as it has been in the past few months there is a risk that it will simply increase reserves. Now that doesn’t mean to say that trying to increase the supply of broad money won't work, you can do that through the non-bank sector.But of course as I've stressed for a long time you know the last year, a fundamental challenge facing policy is to restore the health of the banking system. That's why the Five Point Plan announced in January is so important. We have to get this to work. And one way or another it is important that the government takes enough actions to ensure that the banks resume lending.
Dow Jones: Mervyn King:Page 34 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009Is the plan that you've got enough in terms of the banks?Well let me tell you what the plan is, the five points. It's capital, it's funding, it's lending agreements between the banks and the government, specific measures on housing and the asset purchase facility.And on capital there are a range of things. This is absolutely necessary - a range of approaches here which the government can use effectively to offer insurance to the bank's balance sheet. So it can be done either through offering insurance to a particular set of assets in a bank, or it can be done through offering insurance to the balance sheet as a whole. But one way or another, the government will ensure that the big banks have enough capital. That's necessary but it's not sufficient.Another thing that needs to be done is on funding. The Credit Guarantee Scheme is being expanded and in April it will encompass a wider range of assets.The third thing is that in order for banks to have any access to those two facilities it will have to sign a lending agreement. That's very important. And in order to access the expanded Credit Guarantee Scheme or to take advantage of any of these facilities to ensure that capital is adequate, banks will have to sign a lending agreement. That will specify the amount by which lending needs to go up.Fourthly, where there are particular problems in the housing market. In the UK the particular problem in the housing market is that some of the lenders have either disappeared, Northern Rock, Bradford and Bingley, or foreign banks have withdrawn. It doesn’t make sense for Northern Rock to continue to run down its balance sheet. Merely ending the running down of the
Facilitator:Joel Hills, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 35 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009balance sheet of Northern Rock adds something like one third to the lending to households for mortgage activity. So that's a specific activity which the government can put in place in the housing market.And then the last one in the corporate borrowing market is the Asset Purchase Facility which we've been discussing this morning.Now if these things are implemented effectively it's hard to see what else you could do. You're dealing with capital of banks, funding of banks, lending agreements, dealing specifically with the housing market which is the major source of borrowing by households and dealing with corporate borrowing. It's hard to see that there's anything else left actually. But what matters is there is a clear five point plan and it needs to be implemented effectively.We're running out of time so Joel last question.Two very quick questions. The first, you seem convinced of the need to increase the money supply and the idea is that it will happen at some stage. Why are we waiting? What hasn’t it happened already or why isn’t it happening now?And secondly also you mention the GDP projections are based on getting bank lending back to normal it seems, paraphrasing what's said here. Given that banks are struggling to access funding to lend to customers can the likes of RBS and Lloyds Banking Group afford to pay bonuses?Well on bonuses I'll make one comment only and then we'll go back to the economics which is what matters. A year ago I
Joel Hills, Sky News:Mervyn King:Joel Hills, Sky News:Facilitator:ENDPage 36 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009made a comment on bonuses. I'll read out to you what I said a year ago and I won't comment further.A year ago I said to the Treasury Committee, 'I think that banks have come to realise that they are paying the price themselves for having designed compensation packages which provide incentives that are not in the long run in the interests of the banks themselves. And I would like to think that that would change'. I made that comment almost a year ago to the Treasury Committee and I don’t intend to add to it today.On your first question we are acting. We've cut bank rate by 4 percentage points from 5% to 1%.Why aren't you doing the quantitative easing, why aren’t...We have to put things in place. You've seen with the asset purchase facility, we announced it, we had an exchange of letters, you've actually got to consult the market, put it in place. We'll actually be ready to roll by the end of this week. That's a lot faster than many other countries have been able to intervene in that. And when it comes to being able to do a wider set of operations involving the Monetary Policy Committee, I'd like to think that when the Monetary Policy Committee next convenes it will be in a position to do that.Thank you.Thank you very much. We've run out of time. Thanks very much everyone.
Page 37 Quarterly Inflation Report - 11th February 2009