INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 11 August 2004 Opening Remarks by the GovernorIn recent press conferences I have described the Committee's central projection for the UK as one of steady growth with low inflation. Today's Report is in the same vein. But it does point to the many uncertainties about the outlook that make the future path of output, inflation, and, therefore, interest rates highly uncertain.A key uncertainty surrounds household consumption. Official data indicate a slowing towards the end of last year and the first part of this year. But the robust growth of retail sales and the money and credit data suggest that any such deceleration is, as yet, modest. Measures of both prices and activity in the housing market indicate that house price inflation may now be beginning to ease. In May I stressed the uncertain nature of the link from house prices to consumption. The correlation between the two in earlier cycles is not necessarily evidence of a causal link; it is possible that in the past both were driven by a common third factor, such as expectations of future incomes. So the outlook for consumption may be somewhat less dependent on the housing market than was typically thought to be the case in the past. Nevertheless, the Committee’s central view is that consumption will continue to decelerate in the wake of moderate income growth and a weaker housing market.Since May, the ONS has published a major revision to the National Accounts which has the effect of raising the estimate of the level of GDP at the beginning of this year by around 1%, largely as a result of substantial upward revisions to productivity, and hence output, in the public sector. But this latter statistical revision has had no impact on the view of the MPC about the amount of spare capacity in the economy. That is because what matters for inflation is the amount of resources absorbed by the public sector, not how productively they are used. As Sir Tony Atkinson pointed out in his interim report on measurement of public sector output, “any recommendations that we make concerning
2the direct measurement of government output should not affect the macroeconomic policy stance”.In presenting the outlook for both growth and inflation, the Committee has decided that it will give more prominence to the projections conditioned on the assumption that official interest rates will move in line with market expectations rather than remain constant over the forecast period. The Committee feels that market rates are often likely to provide a more helpful benchmark than constant rates, although it will continue to publish both projections. The use of a market rate path also allows the forecast horizon to be extended to three years which, the Committee believes, should further enhance transparency. I want to stress that putting more emphasis on the market rate curve does not represent a change in the Committee’s view of how interest rates should be set nor of the horizon over which monetary policy affects the economy.The Committee’s latest projection for GDP growth, conditional on the market expectation of official interest rates, is shown in Chart 1 (GREEN CHART) on page iii of the Report. The central projection is for growth to be above its historical average in the near term, and then to slow as domestic demand moderates. That is broadly similar to the May projection.The Committee’s projection for CPI inflation, again conditional on the market expectation of official interest rates, is shown in Chart 2 (RED CHART) on page iv of the Report. Despite the recent sharp rises in oil prices, CPI inflation has been a little lower than expected in May. The central projection is for inflation to fall back over the next few months before picking up to reach the 2% target around two years from now, and then remaining close to target. High capacity utilisation and a tight labour market, and continued strong growth over the next year, are likely to put upward pressure on costs and inflation. That too is broadly similar to the May projection.As ever, it is important to recognise the risks around the central projection, not least because there is only a small chance that this outcome will materialise. The Committee
3believes that the risks around the central projection are evenly balanced, but they are significant in both directions. The principal downside risks are twofold. First, the low inflation outturns in recent months and years, despite buoyant output growth, suggest that there may have been developments in the supply capacity of the economy that pose a downside risk for inflation. Second, relative to the central projection, the Committee believes that there are downside risks to the level of house prices and hence to consumption, overall demand and inflation. In the other direction, the tightness of the labour market and the apparent absence of spare capacity in the economy suggest upside risks to the central projection for earnings and inflation over the next two years.These risks mean that it is particularly difficult to be confident of where the future path of output, inflation and hence interest rates will lie. What is certain, however, is that whatever the future holds, the MPC will continue to set interest rates to bring CPI inflation back to the 2% target. And it was precisely for that reason that at its meeting last week the MPC judged that a further increase of 0.25 percentage points in the official interest rate was necessary to keep inflation on track to meet the target in the medium- term.