Bank of EnglandInflation Report Q&A 14th May 2014
Richard Edgar, ITV News:Mark Carney:Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News:Page 2 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14Governor, markets have been expecting interest rates to rise in the first three months of next year. Now, your assessment of the economy today seems to suggest that they must be wrong. So can borrowers take comfort that they can relax for now?Well, I don't think we want to get into validating any particular market moves or particular market curves. What our assessment - that's the first point.Second is that the main guidance we're giving is about two things - the medium term path for interest rates that, as the expansion progresses, there is likely to need to be gradual and limited increases in interest rates. Interest rates are likely to remain low relative to historic levels for some time. That's the first point.Second is - the exact timing of the first adjustment of Bank Rate will be a product of the evolution of the economy. Today's not the day. There's additional slack that - wasteful spare capacity that can be used up. I've outlined - we've outlined - I've outlined in my remarks, we've outlined in the Report, a series of things that need to happen to sustainably use up that slack.As we progress, we will get to a welcome moment where the economy is headed far enough back towards normal that there will be the first adjustment in Bank Rate. But that remains to be seen. It's a decision for another day.In today's Report you say that on the central projection the margin of spare capacity is broadly closed only by the end of the forecast period. In February the MPC said it would not be absorbed by the end of the forecast period. Could you elaborate on your views of the time horizon that spare capacity is going to be closed has been brought forward, and
Mark Carney:Robert Peston, BBC:Mark Carney:Page 3 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14does that mean that policy will be tightened earlier than expected?Well, Scott, I mean, it's a pretty - we have a pretty marginal change in the level of GDP in the forecast. So same forecast for this year, slightly stronger next year. But we end up 1 or so higher on the level of GDP by the end of the forecast period. So that's part of the adjustment there. That's marginal.The second is that we have, as I outlined - emphasised in the remarks, we've retained quite a cautious assumption around productivity growth, and the consequence of that - the combination of those two effectively mean what was a marginal amount of spare capacity at the end of the forecast horizon in our view in February is now effectively a closed - a full absorption, I should say, of that spare capacity.But it's really - this is really on the margin, but that's our job - to make those adjustments.The Report points out that new lending for mortgages is currently at very high ratios in respect of loans to incomes. In fact, ratios that you point up are above pre-crisis levels, which rather points to there being an incipient bubble. Do you think there is an incipient bubble in the housing market? And what would be the right tools to deal with it?Well, monetary policy wouldn't be the right tool, at least in our framework. Our framework - this is an MPC press conference, so I'll limit the breadth and depth of my response reflecting our responsibilities as the MPC.We view monetary policy, as part of this framework, as the last line of defence against financial stability risk. And one example of the risks to financial stability which you're
Szu Chan, Daily Telegraph:Charlie Bean:Page 4 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14highlighting could come from the housing market. That's the first point.Second point is that you're absolutely right that the most notable development in terms of mortgage lending as a trend has been the increase in higher loan to income mortgages. For example, high loan to value mortgages are still well below the levels prior to the crisis. Our other underwriting standards have held up quite well.Now we have to take into account - the FPC will have to take into account a few things. One of them is the improvement in underwriting standards because of the institution of the MMR. So unlike prior to the crisis, where that income number was in some cases suspect or overstated, it's much higher quality now. So that's to the positive.On the other hand, mortgages aren't just for - you know - for Christmas; they're over the - in many respects - over the balance of people's lives, and they need to be affordable over the course of the life of the mortgage. And we, as the FPC, will look hard at various measures of affordability. Potential vulnerabilities - debt overhangs that have been built up - there is a range of tools that the FPC could employ in order to address those vulnerabilities, in order to - I would put it more in - potentially to provide insurance against the build-up of bigger risks in the housing market. But they will take those decisions as a Committee in subsequent meetings.I wondered if the individual members of the panel could give us an idea of the amount of spare capacity they personally believe remains in the economy, both in terms of whether it's at the upper or lower end of the Bank's published estimate, and why?Well, I mean the point I should first of all say is that this press conference is supposed to be about the general view of
Mark Carney: Chris Giles, Financial Times:Page 5 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14the Committee, the best collective judgement rather than individual views.The other thing that I would say about spare capacity, that it is by its nature a fuzzy concept. Unlike things like GDP which you can define and in principle usually go out and measure, potential output, the equilibrium level of unemployment, things like that, are not things that we can observe in the real world. They're things that have to be inferred; you need an economic model to make any statement about them. For me, that means that they are essentially highly uncertain things; it doesn't make sense to try and put very precise numbers on them.My central view is actually the whole of that 1-1.5% band, and I could see the true margin of spare capacity in the economy being either significantly smaller than that or significantly greater than that. That reflects the reality of our lack of knowledge about the extent to which the economy can expand without generating additional inflationary pressures. And I really counsel people here not to get hung up on precise estimates. There's a real danger of spurious precision and a pretence of knowledge in this area.Very good. Yes.For those of us who were here maybe 10 years ago, let's say 2005, we'd have heard the Bank of England also saying - taking great comfort from a very sanguine and very benign inflation forecast looking forward and reasonably strong growth forecasts and a statement that the Bank was going to be extremely vigilant about other risks that there might be in the economy.I notice that you - even how your inflation forecast, even if on unchanged rates rises only to 2.39%, which most people would say would be absolutely fine.
Mark Carney:Page 6 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14Why should we take great comfort that this time is different?Well - I'll cut into your question this way, and I'll give you a follow-up if you think I'm avoiding it. Because I think the lesson that certainly I take, and we institutionally take from the experience, not just here, but in a variety of other advanced economies, of the period prior to the crisis is you can have periods of price stability - and remember, and you know this, Chris, that the Bank did deliver on its inflation target, did deliver on its mandate.What wasn't part of its mandate, wasn't core to its mandate, were issues around financial stability. There was - it was one of the objects, but it didn't have the tools to help deliver on that.So what's different today, I think where the risk lies more broadly in terms of a sustained, durable, balanced expansion, are risks not just to price stability, but risks to financial stability. Those domestically are centred in risks associated with the housing market - not exclusively so; there are risks in financial markets as well that we have to be alert to, but they're centred in risks to the financial market. The difference today is that, as you know, we have a much broader suite of tools. We also have a much clearer mandate of responsibility to help mitigate those risks. I don't think we can eliminate those risks, but there's actions we can take to mitigate those risks.And what we need to do as an institution, and what we are doing as an institution, is to ensure that the various committees, analysts, professional economists are sharing analysis, talking to each other, understand the policy reaction functions and reactions of each of the wings of the Bank of England, so that we act in a way as much as possible to fully exploit the synergies between the FPC, the MPC and the PRA,
David Smith, Sunday Times:Mark Carney:Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mark Carney: Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Page 7 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14to ensure that an environment of relatively predictable - low, stable, predictable inflation, that the MPC is committed to deliver, is not associated with great risks to financial stability at the same time.Governor, you said you didn't want to endorse a market view of interest rates, but aren't there two things which sort of endorse the market view of interest rates? One is that you won't wait until spare capacity has been used up before you begin to tighten policy; and secondly that the forecast shows that on constant interest rates, inflation will be above target over the forecast period.So somewhere in between the two is, given our best knowledge today, implies a certain policy reaction function. It's not a decision we need to take today; we haven't taken it. And we don't publish, obviously, a specific policy path for Bank Rate. What we have been doing, as you know, David, and reiterated in the Report, reiterated by my comments this morning, is to provide as much guidance as we can about the medium term path, medium term shape of where interest rates will go - which is we expect limited and gradual increases over time.You used this phrase, a new phrase, about remaining at or around historic lows. And apart from the 0.5%, the historic low was 2% I think in 1867, 1876 and 1932. I just wondered - is this an indication that the new top for rates is around 2%?It's not that specific, no.How, with employment at a record - employment growth at a record growth this year of 3.4%, how is that not escape velocity?
Mark Carney:Page 8 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14Well, when we've talked about escape velocity - at least when I've talked about escape velocity - it's been in the context of not just a specific growth rate, but growth that is balanced. So not a single driver of growth. And also a supply side response in the economy. So let's take those in sequence.In terms of the balance, we are seeing initial signs of greater balance to growth. In fact, with the revisions, consistent I would say with survey evidence as well, there is a greater contribution of investment now. Investment plays a central role in the durability of our forecasts going forward, so we need to see that sustained in terms of investment. But we have some greater balance moving away from household spending.But for that balance to sustain, we need to see the supply side response, we need to see productivity pick up - that's the only way that we will see sustainable real wage growth which is going to be necessary to sustain not an aggressive household spending forecast, but just a very reasonable household spending forecast.Because, as you know, Faisal, what's happened in this recovery is that there's been a reduction in uncertainty, there's been a sharp fall in the savings ratio from - by households - from very precautionary levels to much more reasonable levels. And that's given the initial kick to the recovery.But that can't sustain forever. We have an additional reduction in the savings rate early on in the forecast, but then consumption's going to be driven by wages - real wage growth. And that's going to require productivity growth.So we're at a point where we are seeing some broadening of demand to investment; it needs to sustain. We haven't yet seen that turn on the supply side. Productivity growth still is
Larry Elliott, the Guardian:LaughterLaughterPage 9 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14quite choppy and quite low. And we're only beginning to get to the point where we have thought really for the last six months or so that we would start to see real wage growth happen. It hasn't happened yet, but we expect to see it. And we need all of those elements to truly be at escape velocity.Can I just take up your welcome return to sporting metaphors. It's been a long time since we heard a Governor use a sporting metaphor, but - England teams always set off for the World Cup with high hopes -- normally, from the last, tragic campaign. This time the squad does seem to be in quite fine fettle - you know, inflation is low, unemployment's coming down, growth is robust, interest rates are at moderate levels, the housing market's not booming out of control. History suggests that within a month the team comes back with its tail between its legs and the inevitable -- post mortem takes place as to what went wrong. And normally what goes wrong with the football team is they're not seen to be quite as good as they thought they were. And what tends to go wrong with the British economy, historically, is that we're a bit more inflation-prone than people think we are.So I just wondered whether you think you're being just a tad complacent about the inflation risks to the economy, given that interest rates have been at historic lows for more than five years, your own forecasts show the economy growing at 3% on average for the next three years, and unemployment's coming down at a fairly strong lick.
Mark Carney:Page 10 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14Don't you think that there is a case for being a little bit more robust about the timing and the extent at which interest rates need to go up, given that history?Not at all. Not at all. I think you've stretched the analogy too far. This is an economy that's just coming back to its level in 2008. This is an economy that's just catching up to keeping the competitive sporting - just catching up to levels that, you know the French and the Italians have achieved. So this is not - now it has more momentum, obviously, than some of those Continental economies, and that is reflected in our forecasts.You'll recall as well, Larry, in terms of the complacency - I'm going to use your term. The Bank doesn't make a forecast, and the MPC doesn't make a forecast, on what we hope will happen, but what we expect will happen. We do - in making those forecasts, we emphasise the degrees of uncertainty around those forecasts. But at present the MPC's forecast is very much at the upper end of expectations in terms of the strength of growth. So we're starting from a higher bar in terms of inflationary pressure because we think we have more momentum in this economy.We have very modest assumptions on productivity; we do not close any of the gap that has opened up over the course of the last six years between this economy and other economies. So the extent to which the UK economy is now roughly 20% less productive than the US economy, where a gap has further opened up between the UK economy and the French economy.Now that's unlikely to persist because there are no structural changes in this economy that - apart from the difficulties that we've had in the financial sector - there are no structural changes that would be consistent with that continuing. So we
Jonathan Ferro, Bloomberg Television:Mark Carney:Page 11 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14have assumptions on both sides that challenge or would reinforce price pressures. But the fact is there's a fair degree of slack, there's a very benign global inflationary environment and further I would say, prior to my arrival, that this Committee - the three other members and their colleagues – made the right calls about a series of one-off hits to inflation, which kept inflation above target and by looking through those, set policy appropriately to help ensure that inflation is close to target today, as opposed to being well below.I mean, with mis-steps in policy - it's my personal opinion - mis-steps in policy in the path - the sort of ration function you're implying, the danger would be I'd be writing a letter for missing on the downside right now, as opposed to on the upside. And that's one of the differences between the environment here and across the Channel.Governor Carney, I want to say on inflation but perhaps take your side of things. Given the appreciation in sterling, isn't the risk that inflation actually heads further south? How much of a risk do you think that is, that actually you won't be able to get inflation up to 2%?Well, two things on the exchange rate. I think the first is that - just to pick up my last answer - is this Committee rightly looked through one-off effects from the depreciation of the currency post the crisis that pushed inflation above target. We have taken into account the impacts of the recent appreciation, but we will largely look through those impacts in terms of setting monetary policy. So inflation is lower in part, as you say, because of the strength of sterling.The second thing I'll say is that, you know, the movements in exchange rates in the recent past have reflected differences in the strength of recoveries, and the UK recovery has been stronger than some others, albeit from a very low base, it has
Andy Bell, 5 News:Mark Carney:Charlie Bean:Page 12 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14been stronger. Persistent strength, persistent strength of sterling, will challenge the balance of the expansion.Governor, there are lots of people out there right now trying to make decisions about borrowing money, about whether to take on a mortgage, wondering what is the best guidance on what is going to happen with interest rates. Can you just spell out for them, for those people who are actually trying to make those decisions, what is the best guidance you can give?I can think of no better person than Charlie Bean to answer that question.Well, I mean the best guidance we can give is actually what the Governor has already said in his opening statement. That we expect conditions to be such that we don't need to tighten policy immediately, there's still slack that needs to be used up. And when the time does come to start tightening policy, our current best estimate is that it's likely to rise gradually and to a level materially below the averages that we saw pre- crisis. And our February Inflation Report set out some of the reasons for that.We think this will be a feature not just of the UK economy, but the US, all the advanced economies, that for some time the average level of policy rates is going to be lower than it was pre-crisis. And that reflects both the continuing headwinds from the financial crisis - banks still repairing balance sheets, things like that - the global forces that have driven world real interest rates down, so things like relatively high savings rates in China. And finally the extreme compression of risk premia that we saw in the run-in to the crisis is not likely to be a feature of the world in the years after. If it is, we will be getting quite worried.
Andy Bell, 5 News:Charlie Bean:Ed Conway, Sky News:Mark Carney:Page 13 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14So it's fair to say they won't be rising for next year and when they do they'll be historically low?I'm not going to give you a specific date, if for no other reason that I'm not going to be on the Committee to take the decision.I was struck, Governor, when you talked about monetary policy not being the right tool to deal with the housing market. I mean that seems like quite a stark determination. You're confident that these financial policy tools, the macroprudential tools that you have, you're absolutely confident that these untested tools will be capable enough and effective enough to deal with what some people see as an incipient housing market, given we've got decades of experience of knowing what interest rates do to the housing market and very little experience of these tools?Well, there's a couple of issues. I think you put it in a more extreme way than I did. Monetary policy we view as the last line of defence against financial stability issues, it is a line of defence though, just to be absolutely clear. Now why do we take that approach? We take that approach in part because we have one instrument, if we had only one instrument with respect to monetary policy, effectively Bank Rate. We're trying to hit two targets if we swing it over to financial stability as well. And our first responsibility with monetary policy is to deliver low, stable, predictable inflation - the 2% inflation target. So we're going to use Bank Rate to achieve that.The second point I'd make is that one of the issues that central banks faced in the past, when they had fewer tools, and this institution faced in the past with fewer tools, is that the time horizons for the business cycle - we'll call it the inflation cycle another way, and the credit cycle, or the financial stability cycle, are quite different. Financial stability
Page 14 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14- vulnerabilities build up over time and they tend to manifest themselves farther off in the future than the usual 18, 24- month monetary policy cycle. And so the consequence of using monetary policy in that regard is to miss your inflation target over the usual horizon.Now under our remit we do have the flexibility to do that to some degree. And in the context of using monetary policy as the last line of defence that would be a decision that the MPC would have to consider and take.But we do have a range of other tools, and these are tools, some of which we have a very high degree of confidence about their effectiveness. We can map pretty well the impact of differential capital requirements to lending costs of institutions. We do have an ability - collectively have an ability - in tightening certain mortgage affordability requirements, to discipline underwriting.The issue here is - but what we don't have, what we don't have at the FPC and never will have, is an ability to control all aspects of the housing market, we can't perform miracles. The FPC will not build a single house, a single one of the 100,000, 120,000 fewer houses that are being built relative to - each year relative to what the economy needs.The FPC will not be targeting house prices; we're not there to do a house price analogue of inflation targetting. What the FPC can do is to reduce risks that emanate from the housing market, can help mitigate those risks. We've outlined - we, as the FPC, have outlined a wide range of tools that we could use; we would use them in a graduated and proportionate response.And the last thing I'll say on it is that the FPC has already taken steps, we took steps in November. And some of those steps, two of those steps particularly - reinforcement of the
Phil Aldrick, The Times:Mark Carney:Page 15 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14MMR, which basically takes effect now under the FCA, and finally the launch of the stress tests for banks - those steps are just starting to have their effect and will have their effect over the course of the year.You mentioned sterling, and sterling is at a five year high against the dollar and it's at multiyear highs on the basket of currencies as well. I mean at what point does this become an obstacle to rebalancing? You mentioned that it needs to be persistently high. Are you looking at a period of time at this level or a level at which sterling becomes dangerous? And potentially if it does rise, could it be an obstacle to even raising rates? Could it feature or factor into your decisions among the MPC?Two things on it. Clearly the exchange rate is always an important relative price for an economy as open as the United Kingdom's. We distinguish between level effects of movements in the currency, level effects on inflation, so in other words the pass-through of changes in the currency that can be quite large. We certainly incorporate those in our forecasts; in fact it's one of the drivers of the near term forecast for inflation in this Report. We distinguish between that and the real effects that flow through the economy.Those real effects require persistent changes, that's why I emphasised that. And what we can commit - and what we will follow through on - is we will use our speeches, our press conferences, our analysis and Inflation Reports to bring out those effects in terms of our forecast and the balance on forces for both output and inflation.We do need - the last point - we do need more balance during the expansion in terms of the drivers of growth. We will not - the expansion will not endure through household spending. That requires business investment and ultimately will require some recovery in net exports. First and foremost for that
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mark Carney:Page 16 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14recovery is going to be an improvement in productivity, but clearly persistence, level of exchange rate will be relevant to the speed with which that happens.Another question on housing I'm afraid. First, just to clarify - are these forecasts based on the view that the FPC doesn't take any action either next month or over the forecast period on housing? And second do you think that it would have a material impact on the growth in inflation figures if it did use those macroprudential tools, or is it simply about taking risk off the table?Well let me say two things and then I'm going to ask Spencer to supplement. First, the direct answer is we treat macroprudential policy exactly the same way we treat fiscal policy or other economic policy outside our direct responsibility as the MPC. We take current policy as given, okay, so current policy is given, so the forecast is based on the current instruments that the FPC have put in place. We don't try to anticipate any decision of the FPC because as Charlie says we haven't taken the decision yet.The second thing I would say in general terms is that the way we are managing this institution and managing across committees is to as much as possible make sure that there's not just shared information, share analysis, but there's shared understanding of the committees - between the committees - of the objectives of each committee; the policy instruments that each committee has, how they would use them and what the effect of the expected impact of those measures could be.Now macroprudential measures are called macro for a reason, they have an impact ultimately on the economy; we would have to calibrate that. That would be fed into the MPC's thinking going forward, just as would any change in fiscal policy would be fed in as well for the outlook on activity and
Spencer Dale:Page 17 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14inflation. But Spencer - since Spencer is joining the FPC next month, I'll invite him.So let me not presume to guess what the - FPC may or may not do, but let me just in some sense give you a sense about how we think the housing market affects the macro economy. And there's a nice box, I think it was in the last Inflation Report - if not in the last Inflation Report, in the November Inflation Report. And it sort of said - the movements in the housing market can affect the real economy in two ways.One, and we think most importantly in terms of increase in housing market transactions. So increases in housing market transactions we think is the predominant driver to broader economic activity, particularly via the impact that has on construction and in terms of new house builds. Also to an extent there's a degree of consumption which tends to be generated as people move houses, they change their kitchens and so on.The other question is - is, independent of that, do increases in house prices have a material impact on economic activity? And in the past one can observe quite a strong correlation between increases in the house price and economic activity.The question is, is it house prices themselves that are driving that or is it something else? And we published some work in that box which tried to get at that by looking at, as house prices move, do the consumption behaviour of say renters, people who rent houses, change very differently to those who own their house? And if it was house prices themselves, you'd expect to see very different movements.In fact, in terms of the cross section of data, you don't see very different movements. So we don't think house price movements in themselves are a big driver of activity. And so when we're thinking about the macroeconomic implications
Adam Parsons, Five Live:Mark Carney:Page 18 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14it's the transactions, which is where we think is the main driver.First of all congratulations on embracing football. Summer is round the corner, we look forward to your thoughts on cricket, being as erudite as your predecessor.On a more serious note, people have got very used to cheap money over the past few years, a lot of people have borrowed heavily and really taken themselves to the max. As they look forward to interest rates going up, how aware are you, Governor, of the impact that that could have on over- extended, vulnerable, borrowers?Well we are very aware of the pressures a number of people face, a number of households face, across the country really more because of past borrowing as opposed to current borrowing. It's one of the factors that influences our forecast for consumption because of these constraints. That's why the consumption rebound in our forecast is more muted than it would typically be in a recovery.It's also one of the reasons - this repair of private balance sheets that we expect to persist, not at the same pace as it did during the recession, but to persist going forward - is one of the reasons that, alongside all the other reasons that Charlie outlined, that influence the appropriate level of interest rates to ensure that the economy is operating at full capacity and inflation is at target.So it very much does factor into our thinking. And it also factors into the thinking of other parts of the Bank of England when we consider what some of the risks are if underwriting standards were to slip, if affordability terms were to be relaxed excessively and more people would be brought into this unfortunate group of over-indebted households that
Guy Faulconbridge, Reuters:Mark Carney:Page 19 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14wouldn't be able to withstand a normal economic cycle and interest rate cycle that goes with it.Perhaps it's a stupid question, I didn't quite understand - do you see signs of a bubble in the housing market in London? And another stupid question probably, but you've been in your job nearly a year, what have you found most difficult about doing your job? Thank you very much.Answering stupid questions Guy, that's the most difficult thing.You probably didn't understand on the first question because at no point in the Report or in the press conference did we talk about housing in a specific city, a specific borough in a city, because we make policy for the United Kingdom. What's relevant is - and Spencer went through in some detail - what's relevant is the dynamics of housing activity and how that feeds back into ultimately inflationary pressures and how we set policy.I would say a couple of things about the position on reflection looking back through the year. First, I would just reemphasise what privilege it is to have this position at this incredibly important time for this institution, but for the British economy and for the global economies, because in many respects this institution, this economy, is helping to lead the healing of the global economy and certainly helping to lead the fixing of the global financial system.And the biggest challenge, which is the biggest opportunity, is to ensure that we fully realise the potential of this institution; the potential of having the multiple responsibilities under one roof. And we should not underestimate; none of us should underestimate the difficulty of turning this recovery into a sustained and balanced expansion.
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mark Carney:Page 20 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14And in order to do that we need banks that are resilient, which is the responsibility of the PRA; we need appropriately calibrated macroprudential policy, to as much as possible reduce the risks that come in part because of appropriately calibrated monetary policy, monetary policy that has to lean in to big headwinds that will keep, in our judgement, interests rates, not necessarily at emergency levels, but interest rates at lower than historic levels for a considerable period of time. And we need to work with all of those responsibilities in a co- ordinated way in order to deliver that expansion.Just jumping off that point you've just made, I'm interested in to what extent you worry about the adverse distributional consequences of the continuation of very, very low interest rates. And one is thinking not just about the way they favour borrowers over savers, but also the effect on asset prices. Would those considerations ever in your view override sort of more normal monetary concerns about growth and inflation?Well the first thing I'd say is with respect to distributional consequences of any of our policies, ultimately questions of distribution, redistribution, these are political questions and should be taken by the appropriate authorities. And we recognise, we do recognise, that conventional monetary policy, unconventional monetary policy, they do have distributional consequences between savers and investors. For example, holders of certain assets, if you're talking about quantitative easing and asset purchases.The questions of targeting - effectively your question is about targeting specific asset prices, and that is very much not our policy, it's not our policy, it's not our policy stance. We're not targeting house prices, we're not targeting the equity market, we're not targeting high yield spreads.We take into account the underlying dynamics there in our expectations of - and I'm going to turn to you, Paul, to
Paul Fisher:Mario Blascak, World Business Press:Page 21 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14supplement in a sec - we take into account the underlying dynamics in our forecast. We do think, as I emphasised, that the level of volatility in financial markets, a range of financial markets, is going to increase as advanced economies head back towards normal. That will be a natural development, it may not feel natural, it'll maybe feel slightly uncomfortable as it's happening, but that will be a signal of moving back to normal. And Paul, I might just ask you to supplement on that point if you will.Yeah, I think you have to understand our policy focuses very much on what is close to being the risk free rate in terms of Bank Rate, government bond yields in the curve going forwards. If we influence those rates, then all asset prices will be affected by those rates. So that’s how policy works.It’s very much more difficult to influence other price, even if we want to. Now we did very early in the crisis in 2009 carry out a few selected operations in particular markets which had become dysfunctional in corporate bonds and commercial paper. But those are very specifically limited, small amounts of money, just designed to get markets functioning again. That remains part of our armoury, but that is not done for distribution of consequences; that’s done for financial stability and economic monetary management reasons.Governor, getting to the slack, in your Inflation Report you estimate the level of slack of between 1% to 1.5% of the GDP. And as a help you say that half of it is the difference between the actual unemployment rate and the medium term equilibrium rate. The other half is the number of people that are willing to work more than their actual contracts. How this ratio changes given the fact that the new statistics show 1.4 million people in Britain on so-called zero hour contracts, and 35% of those willing to work more, and the unemployment rate getting closer to the medium term equilibrium rate.
Mark Carney:Spencer Dale:Page 22 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14What are your thoughts and your estimates on the Inflation Report?Let me say two quick things and pass to Spencer. The medium term equilibrium rate is a medium term rate and it’s something that we update as we see what happens in the labour market. Now I alluded to this in my opening statement. What we have been seeing is a faster than historic transition of longer term unemployed back into the labour market. In other words people unemployed for more than six months, they have been finding work more rapidly.Now we haven’t updated our estimate of the medium term unemployment rate for that, but we obviously watch it. And that adds to the uncertainty to which Charlie was rightly referring around it’s not just about this 1% to 1.5% range, that’s a sort of the range around central. There's considerable uncertainty in either side of that.The second thing I’d say is that we provided a lot more information both in this Report and previous reports we’re trying to provide as much as possible on this, both in terms of the time series of the various determinants and also the sensitivity to different assumptions on the degree of slack. And I’ll pass to Spencer to elaborate.Yeah, so for those of you who had the Report, if you turn to page 28 and 29 of the Inflation Report. On page 29, I won’t take you through that now, it just provides a box explaining, as the Governor was just saying, how we think about measuring the degree of economic slack in the economy. And essentially we think of there being slack, so the way we think about slack is the degree to which you could use up increased output now without putting any additional pressure on inflation.
Richard Barley, Wall Street Journal:Page 23 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14That can be associated with spare capacity, either within companies or within the labour market. Our judgement is that within companies the degree of spare capacity is around normal levels at the moment, and so the degree of spare capacity is concentrated largely in the labour market. As you said, roughly half of that within the degree of unemployment, and roughly half in terms of those people who wish to work longer hours.On page 28 the bottom chart, Chart 3.7, it provides a time series of our judgements of those gaps, and just makes clear the point that we think - that shows you the movements. And we do think that the degree of slack or the gap in terms of both the unemployment gap and the average hours gap has got less over time.In terms of your specific point about zero hours and so on, the type of information we use when trying to gauge the degree of underemployment is we can use quite detailed micro data evidence where people are regularly surveyed and said - How many hours do you currently work? And - How many hours would you like to work? There's another question which says - How many people currently are working part time but would like to work full time? Despite quite considerable increases in hours, those measures still remain at quite high elevated levels, and it’s for that reason we think there's still scope. There's just sort of that gap in terms of underemployment as well unemployment.Governor, both in the last set of minutes and in your opening comments today you talked about the low level of volatility in financial markets. But it seems like a large portion of that may be attributed to policies like forward guidance and zero rates at central banks, not only the Bank of England but the ECB and the Fed as well. To what extent are central banks part of the problem here?
Mark Carney:Page 24 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14Well, let’s divide that into periods of time. The first phase of guidance, as you know, what we were doing and the Fed was doing were setting out minimum conditions for even beginning to think about adjustments in Bank Rate. So we weren’t even going to begin to think about adjusting Bank Rates until the unemployment rate had reached 7%. And obviously that gave quite a high degree of comfort for financial markets, more importantly for businesses, households, but certainly for financial markets in terms of expectations of when there would be the first possible adjustment.Now we’re into the second phase of guidance, and the second phase of guidance has focused much more in terms of the medium term. And I would say both for ourselves, and I can’t speak for the Federal Reserve, but my reading of what the Federal Reserve says is quite similar to what we have been saying about gradual and limited increases when the time comes, for a variety of reasons.Inevitably - and what we’ve further done - is to focus in as much as possible about the conditions that need to be in place in order for the adjustment, the first adjustments in Bank rate. As Charlie has outlined, as we outlined in the Report, and Spencer has elaborated, there is considerable uncertainty about the amount of slack in the economy. We’re going to learn as we go along about that, not just about the degree of slack but how much momentum the economy continues to have. I outlined and emphasised in my opening comments a series of things that are necessary for sustained momentum during the expansion, most notably productivity growth and real wage growth. Different people in markets will have different opinions about both elements there, and that will naturally bring greater volatility into markets. That’s natural, and that’s healthy.
Page 25 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14I'll make two other comments, one on monetary and one on market structure. The monetary one, I would emphasise that of course there is some dampening - not because of active central bank policy but just because of being at the zero lower boundary - some dampening on volatility.And the market structure comment I’ll make is that a series of financial reforms have moved liquidity risk - more of the liquidity risk - to private financial institutions, quite rightly. However that liquidity risk is not being fully priced in markets in our judgement, and in part it hasn’t because there hasn’t been the test of an adjustment in volatility. We saw a mini test about a year ago with the changed perceptions of Fed policy. We will see other tests in time to come.And so we would expect, over the medium term, that a liquidity premium would be priced into a series of spread products, asset prices, that is higher certainly than it was prior to the crisis, and higher than it is now. To loop back to monetary policy, that is just one other reason that even with a healed financial system that on the margin the risk free rate would be lower than it was previously.Nils Blythe:	Now we are into extra time but I think we have one last question from Anthony.Anthony Hilton, Evening Standard: You said earlier, quite rightly, that you make policy for the whole country, but given that the London economy is on amuch faster track than the country as a whole and is likely to continue, how long is this sustainable? And specifically, if the London economy shows signs of overheating while the rest of the country is still quite chilly, which interest will take precedence?Mark Carney:	I understand the question. It’s a simple answer. We make policy for the country as a whole. We will not target policy toa specific region. A sustainable durable recovery - as strong
Page 26 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14as the economy can appear in London and the Southeast, and to some extent it appears stronger than it actually is, I’d remind you that unemployment is higher in London than it is in the national average, than it is in other regions. As strong as that region appears, it cannot sustain an expansion in the UK. So there needs to be the broadening. We are seeing evidence of that broadening across the country, and we’ll continue to set policy for the UK as a whole.If we’re out of time I might just extend it a tiny bit if I may, Nils. Because you know one of the facts of life in football is your favourite players get transferred to other clubs, and typically when they’re at, you know, peak performance. And we have a couple of examples of that today.This is the last Inflation Report press conference for three of my colleagues here. In fact only the - you’re just going to have me next time joined by Ben Broadbent, Andy Haldane and Minouche Shafik for those of you who come in August. But I want to just say a word of thanks on my behalf, but also on behalf of past colleagues, past governors, to these gentlemen.First with Paul Fisher, who has had 21 international appearances, 21 press conferences appearances, who has provided invaluable markets expertise to the MPC - and not just expertise and perspective about financial markets and the economy - but led the design of some of the most complex and effective financial interventions that the Bank of England put in place during the crisis. But very importantly from a monetary policy perspective with Funding for Lending, an instrument that was highly effective, and we’re seeing the benefit of that now with the recovery.Paul, as you know, is going to the PRA to be Deputy Chief Executive there, and help lead their efforts.
Charlie Bean: Mark Carney:Page 27 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14Spencer Dale, 24 appearances at this press conference, but over 200, he participated in over 200 MPC rounds. Spencer has been there since its inception in 1997. In fact the only MPC process I think you ever missed was when you were at the Federal Reserve Board for a couple of years. And he's made an enormous contribution to that process. He will make an enormous contribution to its analogue at the FPC, and I thank you for - I thank again Spencer for his service there.I will say that both of these changes go to the heart of what we were discussing during this press conference, which is the importance of all bits of the Bank working together, working as effectively as possible. We’re taking our best people and making sure that we work as one bank. And so we work in a co-ordinated fashion across all our policies, responsibilities, because a sustainable durable expansion is not in the gift of just the MPC. It requires the work of the FPC, it requires the work of the PRA. And that’s the contribution of the Bank of England as a whole to that, and others will, in particular the private sector, will deliver.Now the last but certainly not least I want to pay tribute to Charlie Bean who is not accepting a transfer but he's -- a crock -He's leaving the pitch. And after 54 appearances here, but just an outsize contribution to first economic policy and economic thought in this country at the Treasury, 14 years at the Bank, in academia. I can say from personal experiences over the last decade working with Charlie internationally, he is hugely respected, hugely influential internationally.It was about six years ago actually when you were appointed Deputy Governor, and we were in Calgary of all places as I recall.
Charlie Bean: Mark Carney:ENDThat’s right.Page 28 Inflation Report Q&A - 14.5.14And we had the pleasure of celebrating along with your wife, at that time. And thank, you know, thank God that you were appointed Governor given the difficulties that have transpired since.I do want to, on a personal note, thank Charlie for extending his international career an additional year. It’s been a tremendous help to me in terms of my transition, making not the most difficult, to go to the question, not you know the difficulties of the first year, but turning the challenges into opportunities.And so, Charlie, I thank you personally, and on behalf of the Bank of England, but really by extension on behalf of everyone in the United Kingdom and internationally, for your service.So with that, thank you very much.