Inflation Report Q&A 12th November 2014
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mark Carney:Page 2 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14Governor, you spoke about the spectre of economic stagnation in Europe. Could you give us some idea about how much of a particular threat that is to the UK economy, and would you like to see your counterparts at the European Central Bank broadening out their own stimulus measures to help counteract that?Well, in terms of developments in Europe, they are troubling, without question. I think stagnation is the right - is the right term to characterise growth that will bounce around below 1% for some time to come and has some downside risks ascribed to it.I would say, though, that what we're seeing, for the UK, are two effects - two direct economic effects. We're seeing obviously lower demand for our exports, which has consequences; and we're getting some imported disinflation from European exports - imports from Europe, more precisely.What we're not seeing are confidence effects - material confidence effects on our businesses, in terms of business investment. We've marginally reduced our investment profile, but it's a strong investment profile in this forecast.And we're not seeing financial market confidence effects - any challenges from that. In fact, overall financial conditions here in the UK are easier now than they were in August, because of the adjustment in risk-free rates. So it has to be kept in perspective.With respect to measures by the European Central Bank, we compliment the colleagues there for the range of measures that they are putting in place. I guess I would emphasise that facilities have been announced, but the actual implementation of those facilities has still to come, assets are still to be purchased - the December term LTRO will be
Robert Peston, BBC:Mark Carney:Page 3 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14important. Other measures might be taken, as has been discussed - all in an effort to provide additional monetary stimulus.I'd underscore, as they have underscored, that this is not just about monetary policy. Monetary policy alone is not going to turn around the challenges in Europe. There is a marginal role for fiscal policy, if it is co-ordinated and consistent - consistent with the rules in the euro area. And most fundamentally, there is an immense role for considerable additional structural reforms that will be required to change the trajectory of the eurozone.If you'll indulge me, Governor, I've got two short questions. One - how damaging is it for the reputation of the Bank of England that you've had to sack your Chief Dealer? And in your view, is the longest recorded squeeze on living standards for British people now over?In terms of the first question, we hold ourselves at the Bank of England to the highest standards, as you would expect. And with respect to the specific situation to which you're referring, you start - when holding yourself to the highest standards, the first thing you do is - if you have any indication of any improper behaviour or potential knowledge of improper behaviour - and that's really where this started - is you immediately investigate - the Governors launched an investigation late last year, once we found some evidence or cause for a deeper investigation.The Oversight Committee of the Court of the Bank of England launched an independent inquiry, headed by Lord Grabiner. I would like to thank him - as a member of Court, I'd like to thank him and his team for very comprehensive work - and it is absolutely comprehensive - millions of documents, messages, emails, chats of Bloomberg, etc. And then you act on the - you act on the results.
Page 4 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14I'm going to make an important point and then I'm going to return to FX. The dismissal of an employee was for reasons that were unrelated to the FX investigation itself. It was information that was uncovered during the course of that investigation, and it was information which indicated - in the judgement of an independent employment review - represented serious misconduct, acting inconsistent with the Bank's internal policy. So that was the cause for dismissal; it's independent - I don't know that we would have necessarily discovered it if we hadn't had the review, but there it is.But to go back to Lord Grabiner's report and what he found in terms of the Bank of England, I would say that we were disappointed with what he identified as the behaviour of one of our employees. Disappointed because we hold ourselves to the highest standards and I have to say - and I really want to say - that we have an outstanding Markets Division, with exceptional individuals who serve the British public in a remarkable way, day in, day out. And a huge number of them are under exceptionally difficult circumstances over the course of the last decade. But we have these high standards.What Lord Grabiner found, and we accept his criticism, is that our Chief Dealer was aware of circumstances in the market that could facilitate, or could lead to, improper behaviour by market participants. So aware of those circumstances, and he did not raise those concerns within the institution and certainly didn't take any steps to address them. And that's the error of judgement.But he wasn't aware, nor was anyone else in the Bank, of any improper - actual improper or unlawful behaviour, and certainly nobody at the Bank - and there's absolutely no evidence and no reason to think - nobody was involved in any
Page 5 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14improper or unlawful behaviour. Those are all findings of Lord Grabiner.Now that's - those are low bars. We have high standards. So, you know, we're disappointed. But if you have high standards, you have to act accordingly. And I would say that we are resolute from the Court of the Bank of England through to the Senior Executive, and to all - you know, to our colleagues in the markets area and across the Bank, to implement the core - all the recommendations, I should say, which we accept in full, of Lord Grabiner, which revolve around documentation.We have a new documentation management process in train; we have to make sure it's consistent. In terms of education, making sure people understand our codes and standards. And in terms of how we handle market information, market intelligence. So that's my answer to your first question.Your second question was way over somewhere else - was I declaring the end of something? Longest squeeze.Well, I think I would hesitate to do that at this stage. I mean, what I would underscore is what we are seeing is encouraging signs in the labour market, encouraging signs with respect to pay. We are seeing the start of real pay growth. This is consistent with our forecast from earlier this year, absolutely consistent with our forecast in August. We expect this to - this pick-up to accelerate. I think our underlying assumption for 2015 is average weekly earnings growing a little above 3%. So with inflation running around 1%, 1.5%, that's real wage growth.So we expect - we do expect to see it. And it's both an expected development and obviously it's a welcome development. But, you know, one swallow doesn't make a
Richard Edgar, ITV News:Mark Carney:Page 6 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14summer. I mean, this - this has to persist for the recovery to be durable.Last point I'll make to bring it back to inflation is - of course what is crucial ultimately for inflation is where our unit labour costs go - and so the relationship between pay growth and productivity. And as we sit here today, you look back over the course of last year, we're still in a situation where unit labour cost growth is at best flat, if not slightly negative.Governor, I want to come back to those encouraging signs that you referred to. Wages by one measure are exceeding inflation, we learnt today. Could you explain what that means for interest rates in the year to come?Well, first thing. Wages in a well-functioning economy, normal economy, normalised economy - wages will exceed inflation - wages will exceed inflation. And they'll exceed inflation because productivity growth will be above zero, and so that unit labour costs growth will be consistent with the inflation target in the equilibrium that we never - to which we always aspire but never actually achieve. You know, you'll see nominal wage growth, let's call it around 4%; productivity growth around 2%; you know labour costs growth around 2%; margins, you know, at a normal level; then inflation bang on 2%. And everyone is happy; you have no questions except - you have just praise for the MPC, Richard.So we - I'll repeat elements of my answer to Robert, which is that we've expected this pick-up; it's been in the surveys, we're starting to see it in the hard data. We're seeing it - we have a sense of it as we go round the country and talk to businesses and talk to labour - I was at the TUC Conference a few months ago.
Richard Edgar, ITV News:Mark Carney:Larry Elliott, the Guardian:Mark Carney:Page 7 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14And we need it. We need it to get inflation back to target, because there are some pretty big disinflationary forces that are largely coming from abroad at this time.And in the simplest terms, what does that mean for interest rates?Well, our forecast is consistent with some increase in interest rates over the course of the next three years, and we expect those increases to be done at a gradual pace and to a limited extent. But the extent to which a necessary precondition is to see wage growth, real wage growth - but it's not - it's never been a threshold, it's never been a trigger certainly. So it's welcome, but the guidance on interest rates remains at the level it does.When commodity prices were pushing up inflation to 5%, the Bank looked through it and decided it wouldn't adjust monetary policy as a result. Is the same approach being taken this time now that commodity prices are pushing down inflation? And if not, why not?It's the right question. I think I'd put it in this context. We have [audio cuts out momentarily] I'd broaden it a bit from commodity prices because commodity prices [audio cuts out momentarily] sterling, move up in sterling - we get the pass through. Level shifts in - potentially level shifts that might persist for a while. The rate of inflation in some of our big trading partners, so we get some important disinflation. All those things - do you look - to what extent do you look through those? And they're material to the inflation outlook.We have symmetry in terms of our approach, but it's not blind symmetry. Let me explain that. When the MPC did the right thing - and I wasn't here, so I can objectively say they did the right thing - and looked through those increases on the upside, their expectation was that inflation would come
Page 8 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14back to target quite quickly, within the normal monetary policy horizon - 18 to 24 months. So they were looking through, but they weren't stretching, their remit.They were also looking through something when the domestic pressures on inflation could be expected to go the other way. In other words, there was a large output gap, there was a lot of slack in the labour market. You could see the types of disinflationary forces that we're experiencing - we've been experiencing. So they made those calls.And, you know, what happened was there was a series of one-offs and it took longer, as it turned out. But that wasn't the expectation at the time.We sit here today, and this is my not being blindly symmetric. Our expectation is that this disinflation, largely let's call it from abroad - I'm including sterling in this from abroad - will persist for some time. We don't expect to get back to target in 18 to 24 months; we expect to get back to target in three years - at the end of three years.So second point which bears remembering is - where does your lower bound? So the MPC post-crisis, inflation above target, the question was whether to use conventional policy to tighten. At the zero lower bound. If you make a mistake, the question is whether to start using unconventional policies again. So there is an asymmetry in terms of policy connected to Zero Lower Bound.But we're in a circumstance where we see - once these forces come off - this is our projection, our expectation - once these forces largely come off - and that's - you can have a different opinion about exact timing, but let's say somewhere between one or two years from now. Reasonable people can disagree when that burns off, the speed of pass through of sterling, for
Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News:Mark Carney:Page 9 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14example. The domestic drivers of inflation will reassert - the issues around wages, unit labour costs.And we expect that consistent with those picking up, there would be some tightening of monetary conditions, that we would have some interest rate increases in order to achieve the inflation target as the economy normalises.Governor, you said more likely than not you're going to have to write a letter to George Osborne explaining why inflation is one percentage point away from target. What are you going to say in that letter in terms of why the MPC is not taking action? Is it because, by saying it's appropriate that markets are pushed back to their rate expectations, you're happy for them to do the work for you?Well, if you don't mind, I'll decide what I say in the letter, if I have to write the letter, because our forecast is for inflation not - I mean, our central expectation is that inflation dips around 1%, but doesn't actually dip below, so strictly speaking, I do not expect to write the letter; it's just the balance of probability goes the other way.In terms of the markets doing some of the work, others pick up on that point - yeah, the markets have done some of the work, as I said in my opening comments, taking out some of the tightening farther out. With the well-functioning financial system, very well-functioning banking system now, that gets passed on. I used one example, which is fixed mortgage rates - there are others. And that provides some additional stimulus.I would reiterate, though, that the MPC's view is consistent with tightening of monetary policy over the forecast horizon. It's a question of degree.
Michael Bird, Business Insider:Mark Carney:Ben Broadbent:Page 10 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14The latest Geneva Report has been released since your last press conference. One of the things that it notes is the sort of very slow process of deleveraging among households, especially households in the UK, who remain the most indebted in the advanced world.What I was looking for an answer on was how closely the Bank pays attention to the effects on disposable incomes when households are so indebted at a time when you're thinking about how to tighten policy?Okay, I'll say a word on that and then I'll pass to Ben. It's a very important question. I might not fully accept the most indebted in the advanced world point; there are certainly some Scandinavian countries that would - are more indebted than the UK. And I would underscore that the level of gearing of UK households has been coming down since the depths of the crisis - fallen about 20 percentage points actually. But it's still relatively indebted, and there certainly are vulnerabilities, and that's part of the reason why a different committee, the FPC, took out insurance on the housing market.But this question about the differential impact of responses to potential monetary tightening, given debt loads, is something we've looked at. I'll pass to Ben in a second.I'll just make on point before I do, which is that one of the issues is how financial institutions react when rate increases happen - how much of that flows through to higher mortgage rates versus high deposit rates. And that is something, when the FPC stress tests are released next month, you'll have some detailed information on - built up from the microstructure of banks themselves. But Ben?I won't add much. There's a box in the Inflation Report on Page 22, which gives a summary of our latest annual survey
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mark Carney:Page 11 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14of household finances, which has been conducted I think for ten years or so and will be published in full in the next Quarterly Bulletin.There's a couple of charts in there. One makes clear for the aggregate household sector, the point the Governor made a moment ago, which is that actually gross debt burdens have been falling relative to income for quite some time. Net of liquid assets - of deposits - that gap has shrunk by a little bit more because deposit ratios have been rising in the meantime.And the second point to make is that nevertheless, there is still a tail of households with relatively elevated debt. The size of that tail has also been falling, as you can see in that second chart, Chart B. But as the Governor explained, that group is likely to be more sensitive to economic shocks of all kinds, including changes in interest rates, than the rest of the household sector. So it is something we keep an eye on.Governor, there's been a pattern in recent inflation reports where markets and the press have taken your words to be very dovish, and then we're told later that we've misinterpreted your comments and we haven't given you an opportunity to say something hawkish. So I'm going to give you that opportunity today. What risks are you running by giving the markets - and they've reacted in a dovish way this morning again - what risks are you running by having markets giving the impression that interest rates will not rise under your forecast until the autumn of next year?And if I may add a very, very quick follow up question which only requires a one-word answer. Can you give a cast iron guarantee that as far your - as far as your knowledge ...No, the answer would be no.
Chris Giles, Financial Times: Mark Carney: Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mark Carney: Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mark Carney:Page 12 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14... Well it's not about, it might be yes ... ... monetary policy ...... Don't say no now; wait till the question. Can you give a cast iron guarantee that, as far as the best of your knowledge, there are no further reports or investigations into misconduct at the Bank of England, at the moment, ongoing?Sorry, you trailed off in the last bit of your ...Can you give us a cast iron guarantee that there are no further investigations into misconduct in markets at the Bank of England at the moment?Okay, understood. In terms of your avian analogy, look I think the first thing that markets react to when we have inflation reports, as they should, is actually the projection that's in the Inflation Report and the consistency of that with, or not, of market expectations.The second thing is, look, I don't - you know I'm still the only G7 governor who has raised interest rates; I just haven't happened to have done it here, but I know how to raise interest rates. But I also know what it is to hit an inflation target, which is what the MPC is striving to do. And there were some commentators, some in this room, some who might even have just spoken, who suggested that we should have raised interest rates earlier this year.It's not clear the way the economy has unfolded and the way inflationary pressures have developed that that would have been right call. Now reasonable people can make different judgements, but we made a judgement then, and it certainly looks right. Obviously, we think that the judgement at present is appropriate. We will raise rates when it's
Helia Ebrahimi, CNBC:Laughter Mark Carney: Laughter Mark Carney:Page 13 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14appropriate. We expect to raise - I - we expect to raise interest rates when - over the course of this forecast horizon.I would add as well that - and you know this, Chris, but I think for maybe some who don't watch as closely - when I, or Ben, or Minouche, Charlie Bean, others speak at this press conference, we speak on behalf of the MPC. I am doing my best to faithfully represent the best collective judgement of the MPC. There'll be times when I disagree with that judgement, but my job is to represent that judgement, and so I do it to the best of my ability.In terms of your second question, we - look, we actively review activities across a range of markets, as you would expect us to do, because as I say we have very high standards.The Bank has said that loose monetary policy is in part due to offset austerity. Apart from today's £1.1bn pay cheque to Treasury from the FX fines, the deficit reduction programme has been faltering slightly. Is that a cause of concern for the MPC and does the Chancellor need to do more? And then, recently Dr Shafik said she was neither a hawk or a dove, but rather an owl. I thought you might want to take the opportunity to characterise yourself, perhaps a loon, the Canadian bird?You found that funny, I can't believe you found that funny ...It's not bad; it's not bad. Look, I'm a pragmatist that's what I am. I am a pragmatist. Set policy to achieve the target, guided by the target, remember the remit, explain as best you can. Reasonable people can disagree about these things,
Ben Broadbent: Mark Carney:Laughter Ben Broadbent:Phil Aldrick, The Times:Page 14 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14but the stance of policy, the judgement of the MPC, which I'm representing today, is a tightening of policy over the forecast horizon.Now our forecast using a market curve embeds less tightening than the market had expected in August. And it's a forecast where inflation does get back to target, but it gets back to target at the end of the forecast horizon.You threw me off with the loon; my short-term memory is going -Fiscal.Oh fiscal - no wonder my memory went because I didn't want to answer it. Yes, Ben?Thank you. Well happily, we don't set fiscal policy, you know; we sent monetary policy and our objective is inflation. It's true that the path of government spending and of the deficit is one of a number of things, many, many things, that would affect our projects for inflation. But it is one of only a number of things.	And of course, we take government policy entirely as given; it's certainly not for us to comment on it one way or the other.If I understand it right, the only reason you haven't lowered your GDP forecast is because the market projection on interest rates has come down. So I just wondered - if they hadn't come down how much would you have lowered your GDP forecast by? And we've had £370bn of QE, rates are not expected to - I mean inflation - rates are not expected to rise under market's forecast until the back - to 1.75%, until the back end of 2017. And inflation still doesn't get back to 2%.
Mark Carney:Ben Broadbent:Mark Carney:Page 15 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14Is inflation never going to be a threat again? I mean it just doesn't seem like it is.You see that's what I thought - with cast iron guarantees and things, that's where I thought Chris might be going. No I mean, our job is to be vigilant and do what is necessary to achieve the inflation target in a way that's consistent with a strong, sustainable and balanced growth.The best way to assess the impact of the market move - it's a crude way - but the best way to assess that is to look at the difference between our forecast in August, using a constant rate assumption, and the difference today, which obviously doesn't have the change and Dr Broadbent is turning to that ...We only have published in the actual Report (you can see both online) but the projection - the latest projection of constant instant rates. But when you compare that with the equivalent in August, you'll see that the growth forecast is lower; I can't give you a precise number. And as the Governor said right at the start, that's the result of a combination of primarily a weaker outlook amongst our trading partners and partly because of that, lower business investment growth at home.And I might just supplement. In the very near-term, less robust activity in the housing market; so still growing the housing market and growing housing market activity, but less robust than we've forecast in August takes off, you know, let's call it 0.1 from contribution to growth on a quarterly basis for the next few quarters. So, you know, it's notable, but over the course of the forecast horizon that's the not the story.The broad point, if I may though, is you're broadly correct, broadly correct in terms of the offset is there. But it's an
Ben Broadbent:Mark Carney: Ben Broadbent: Ed Conway, Sky News:Mark Carney: Ed Conway, Sky News:Page 16 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14offset not just of the weakness abroad, but a slightly less strong, as Ben just said, a slightly less strong investment profile, which in part is motivated by weakness abroad, so it becomes a bit semantic.The only thing I was going, Phil, was when you said never. I mean our forecast period is three years. If you look at the Bank's website, you'll find a spreadsheet that gives you RPI inflation back I think to 1270. So three years is not that long; that's what we limit ourselves to in the forecast.And never is long.Never is a long time.Two questions seem to be in vogue, I have two very quick ones. The first is that you said that the firing of your Chief Currency Dealer wasn't associated with these other big FX fines today. In that case, why have you announced it today? Is this a good day to bury bad news amongst all of that other news?Secondly, you haven't mentioned forward guidance so far, which is rather striking. Are you worried that within the City, the people who actually interpret your guidance, they think that guidance - well I mean you haven't gone into it in great depth, as much in previous times.I can only answer the questions I'm asked.But are you worried - more broadly - this is a broader point, which is - are you concerned that, within the City, for many economists and dealers, forward guidance essentially was seen as a bit of a joke? And for them, the main kind of form of Mark Carney forward guidance is - we don't really want to raise rates, but we're going to come up with a sequence of different excuses to get away with it.
Mark Carney:All talking together Ed Conway, Sky News: Mark Carney:Ed Conway, Sky News: Mark Carney:Page 17 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14I did mention guidance; I mentioned it a couple of times in my opening remarks, I mentioned it a couple of times in terms of limiting gradual increases in answers to subsequent questions. I can't do more than that, Ed; I can't do more than that. If you don't listen to what I say, if you don't listen to my responses. Okay first thing -..... guidance.I said guidance, the Committee's guidance it's forward - "The Committee's guidance remains relevant. When rates do begin to rise it's expected to do so gradually and remain below the historical level for some time to come." I mean look I'm sorry you can read the transcript; you can read the transcript and catch up.In terms of City expectations, this view - we had two phases of forward guidance. The first phase related to a necessary, but not sufficient condition to adjust interest rates. It was a necessary, not sufficient, on which unemployment came down. After we hit that, we provided broader guidance about the shape of tightening - limited and gradual, likely - and justified that - various analysis: first headwinds and then also medium term forces on interest rates.I would say, that view - which we first started talking about this time last year at a speech in New York - has become a mainstream view in financial markets, amongst other central banks, amongst economic commentators. We didn't originate it, but we weren't following fashion; it is a mainstream view....Sorry Ed, it's not - I'm going to respond to your question it's not a discussion.
Page 18 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14The other guidance we've given is around what we would do with our asset purchase facility, depending on when we raise - sorry when we raise rates. In other words, we will continue to reinvest, at least until the point we raise interest rates, and that we would not begin to sell assets until we had raised rates to a point at which we could then materially reduce them if we needed to. In other words, so we could operate in conventional monetary policy space. And that is the guidance we've given and that's the guidance that's consistent. And look, the stance of the MPC, again, is to conduct monetary policy consistent with achieving the inflation target.The sitting down last week to take a decision about whether or not it made sense to raise interest rates (which otherwise tighten monetary policy) today, given our forecast for growth and inflation - a forecast which I would underscore on the growth side is for a continued above trend growth, our view of trend growth in the UK - was not consistent with an optimal path to returning inflation to target. That’s the best collective judgement of the MPC.In terms of your first question and mechanics or logistics, look, the timing of the decision around the dismissal of a bank employee was determined by an employment process, disciplinary process, that was conducted. That came to a conclusion. The timing of the conclusion of that was based on the submission of various evidence including by the employee in question. So that’s what guided it.The publication of the Grabiner report, which again was not directly relevant to that decision - no element of what Lord Grabiner did was considered in the employee’s disciplinary process, was determined by the timing of the FCA. So yes, they came together but there's nothing greater than that.
Jenny Scott:Szu Chan, The Telegraph:Jenny Scott: Mark Carney: Szu Chan, The Telegraph: Mark Carney:Szu Chan, The Telegraph:Mark Carney:Page 19 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14I would be grateful if you could keep your questions to one please so that everyone gets a chance.Good morning. At the risk of joining - the Committee, I’d like to ask a question on the timing. So in the run up to the forecast, markets expected rates to rise in August; your own conditioning is for a rate rise in October and that gets us back to 2%. Is that still consistent with the expectation that rate rises will be gradual and limited? And can I ask a very quick question on the forex? You said that you will implement the Grabiner report -Sorry, one question please. One question, yeah.The first one then.Yeah. So your question is precisely what, sorry? I mean in terms of the consistency of ...?You say that markets expect rates to rise in August; your conditioning is for an October rate rise and that gets us back to target. Is that consistent with your expectation that rate rises will be gradual and limited, considering wage growth is you know showing signs that it’s picking up?Well I think on - I'm glad you go back to wage growth because it’s important. Obviously it’s welcome that we’re seeing this sign of annualised average weekly - you know real wages beginning to increase. If you look on a three-month basis, the pickup is - and of course you can slice this different ways, whether it’s private sector or whole economy, with or without bonuses. But the last two reports have been in the range of 2% to 3%, if you annualise the three-month numbers there. And so you see, you know, a real wage pick- up.
William Keegan, The Observer:Mark Carney:Page 20 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14Now we expect - our assumption for average weekly earnings whole economy is 3.25, 3.5 over the course of 2015 out into 2016, 2017. Again but that’s needed, that’s needed for a variety of reasons. I mean, you know, British households want a pay rise and real earnings growth, and entirely understandable and deserved; but that’s needed to achieve the inflation target over the forecast horizon.There is a variety of ways - you know, what matters for the - to go to your consistency and I’ll stop here - for achieving - in terms of overall monetary conditions, there are a variety of paths of monetary policy that could be consistent in terms of the overall tightening, and precise timing around when the lift off happens, measured in terms of months or even quarters; about that reasonable people can disagree.And market expectations of that, filled with reasonable people, market expectations of that will move around and they’ll move around with the data. And that’s what markets do. The MPC will take the decision when we think it’s - when it's appropriate, and it wasn’t appropriate in November.Thank you. Mr Governor, there's obviously a lot of concern about the impact of the state of the euro area on our exports and our great rebalancing effort. I noticed on page 23 of the report that you say the factors depressing growth are likely to outweigh the potential positive impact of European central bank policy actions in the near term. That's the time the markets are hoping for quite a lot. Can one infer from this - I know this is a delicate matter - but that you have some sympathy with what President Draghi has been saying about the need to relax fiscal policy in the eurozone?I would agree - I mean obviously what you’re drawing our attention to is important, that we don’t see, despite the scale of activity and proposed activity by the ECB, we don’t see a
Richard Barley, Wall Street Journal:Mark Carney:Page 21 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14near-term material impact on European growth prospects, or more precisely - what matters for the UK - demand for our exports. So we’re not being helped by that. And there will be lags even once the balance sheet starts building back up, the ECB’s balance sheet starts building back up.So I would underscore President Draghi’s comments in Jackson Hole, started in Jackson Hole about elements of co- ordination or potential role of sensible, calibrated and co- ordinated fiscal action, if appropriate. Those are obviously decisions for European authorities as a whole and they aren’t decisions for individual European governments, would be the way I would term it.Governor, you've talked quite a lot about disinflationary pressures coming from abroad. It seems to me that some of the policies abroad are to do with exporting the disinflationary pressures they face through the currency. Obviously the ECB is talking a lot about the euro; we’ve had the Fed cite some concerns about the rising dollar. How concerned are you about currency wars? I know it’s not a topic that’s in the headlines, but it seems to me they’re rumbling on.Right. Well we have at the G7 and at the G20, had over the years a series of discussions amongst governors of the BIS, a series of discussions around these issues. There is certainly a strong consensus within the G7 about the importance of monetary policy being targeted to domestic objectives, while taking into account international spill overs - obviously the bigger the central bank, the greater the latter are - about the importance of targeting to domestic objectives. And whether it’s the Bank of Japan, with its new mandate, or the ECB, with its existing, or the Bank of England, those domestic objectives are ultimately centred around an inflation target. And it’s important that any policies that are taken are - can
Andy Bell, 5 News:Mark Carney:Minouche Shafik:Page 22 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14be justified in those terms. And so when we have discussions, it’s to ensure that that remains the case.How concerned are you that another scandal that we’ve had this morning in foreign exchange, coming after Libor, that this can do real damage to the credibility of the financial services industry in this country? And are we tough enough on dealing with it?Well Andy, we have been concerned about the circumstances around this and the conduct in markets more generally, and it’s one of the reasons why I spoke to this issue earlier this year and raised the prospect of a review that would look to establish fair and effective markets. The Chancellor launched that review, and perhaps, if I may, I’ll just ask Minouche to maybe say a word or two of context, because Minouche is leading that review that encompasses the Treasury, the Bank and the FCA.Sure, I’d be happy to. As you probably know, we launched a consultation document on October 27th laying out a wider view about how we could make these markets fair and effective going forward. But even before that, we took an initial - made an initial set of recommendations to the Treasury to bring seven additional benchmarks in the UK into the regulatory perimeter, including the 4.00 p.m. London foreign exchange fix. And that is now under consultation, and the Treasury intends to turn that into legislation as quickly as possible.So I think there have been some important initial steps taken. There are also a variety of international steps that have been taken under the authority of the Financial Stability Board and IOSCO. But I think what’s unique about this review is we’re trying to step back and put all the pieces of the jigsaw together and say - is what we’ve done on benchmarks, is what’s being done in other domains,
Andy Bell, 5 News: Jenny Scott:Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mark Carney:Page 23 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14sufficient, or do we need to do more? And if we need to do more, we’ll make recommendations in June to that effect.Just the question is -Sorry we have to - I'm afraid there's not enough time. There's some people who haven’t had a chance to ask a question yet. Jeremy.Governor, are there, in your view, any circumstances in which Lord Turner’s proposal that central banks start monetising fiscal deficits would be appropriate? And I'm thinking in particular of circumstances whereby price deflation becomes entrenched in the eurozone and elsewhere, to which you know Britain would plainly not be immune?No is the short answer. I can’t envision any circumstance where I think an advanced economy central bank, should pursue helicopter money - a cancellation in effect of government debt, because that’s what it ultimately means - the inability to then bring back the reserves that had been put out into the banking system. If you think about the hundreds and hundreds of billions of additional central bank reserves that we have put into the banking system in order to fund the Asset Purchase Facility, well ultimately we want to be able to take those back. And we need an asset to sell in order to do that.If we cancel that asset on top of that, which is what you need to do for this, how are we going to pay the interest on those reserves? Are we just going to issue more reserves to pay the interest on the reserves and compound and compound and compound? I mean, you can very quickly see how this doesn’t hold together.Of course on top of all that, the reason why one doesn’t even start on this conversation is the removal of any discipline on
Asa Bennett, Huffington Post:Mark Carney:Page 24 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14fiscal policy that comes from that, or would almost certainly arrive from it. And so, no, I can’t see any circumstances where I would advocate, including in the eurozone - forget about it being absolutely prohibited under the Maastricht Treaty - just from as a sense of sound policy, to undertake that in order to achieve.And look, we have - the MPC has shown that it had considerable flexibility and could innovate when it needed to, and that’s part of the reason we’re back where we are today. It was uncomfortable and people criticised at the time, but it’s part of the reason why we’re back where we are today - not in a recovery but in an expansion; not talking about additional unconventional measures, but talking about timing of tightening of monetary policy, which is a welcome place to be.Governor, I just wanted to ask given the Report firms up the idea of the first rate rise happening after the general election, are you personally offended by these suggestions from MPs that you’re secretly trying to help the Chancellor?I try not to be offended, but the - look, we will decide when to tighten policy. First off, we will decide when to tighten policy, as a Committee, based on the inflation target. And the expectation of when that time is will move around with the data, with the economy. If you had asked me that question a year ago, not the question you asked, but if you asked me when I thought we would tighten policy at that time and I had been foolish enough to give you a direct answer, an honest answer, it would have been different than the answer I would give you today.But a lot has happened since then. At that time we expected the increase in wages that we’re seeing now to have happened sooner. We expected stronger growth abroad. We didn’t see a sharp - didn’t expect a sharp movement in our
Mario Blascak, World Business Press Online:Mark Carney: Ben Broadbent:Jenny Scott: ENDPage 25 Inflation Report Q&A - 12.11.14terms of trade. So it will continue to evolve, but it will be absolutely blind to political timing. There's always political timing. It has to be blind; and the only way to be apolitical is to ignore it, which is what we’ll do.Governor, you have lowered your inflation projection for 2015 by about 27 basis points. At the same time, you say in the Inflation Report that the import prices on food and energy are about 0.5% on each quarter. So is the difference clearly either the sterling depreciation or maybe the labour markets like diminishing? So I would like you to give me the sense of what is the mixture of both too?Sounds like a question for you, Ben.27 basis points, I'm not sure I recognise that degree of precision. My guess it’s a little bit more than that. I mean the truth is that most of the drop in the near-term forecast is associated with the continuing effects of lower food and energy prices, lower import prices, tradable prices generally. It was a little bit more - I think it’s less than the number you imply, a little bit more from slightly weaker unit cost growth near term, but the majority you can see is a consequence of this protracted effect from import prices, including in particular, commodities.Thank you very much, everybody.