WORLD TELEVISION Bank of EnglandInflation Report Q&A 13th August 2014
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mark Carney:Page 2 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14Governor, the Bank's always been relatively confident that productivity would bounce back quite sharply, but in this latest round of forecasts you've downgraded it across the three years, and also quite significantly in 2014. Isn't that quite a depressing message? And what, in your view, is the reason why productivity isn't going to bounce back this year, as you previously thought?Well, you're absolutely right we had - sitting here a year ago we had expectations that our productivity growth would be stronger at this stage in the cycle, and actually given the better outturns in terms of activity, we expected that some of that would show up in so called endogenous supply or - endogenous productivity growth and we haven't seen that, so we've taken that learning, that for various reasons it may take longer for productivity to come back.Now we outline in the Report, we've outlined in QB articles, Ben's outlined in some speeches, and other colleagues have, various reasons to account for productivity shortfall and prospective slower return to growth. Some of it's compositional, some of it's to do with the financial sector - the gradual healing process of the financial sector and a slower process of creative destruction; some of it could be due to mis-measurement. None of those factors are individually satisfying, but they're all relevant and we provide a bit of accounting in the Report.But I want to link it back to the forecast because that's the important issue here is that we do have a slower return pick up in productivity and actually we don't get productivity growth back to historic average rates by the end of the forecast, as you indicate. So that productivity shortfall, if you will, is widening.And we're making a call, we're making a couple of big calls about the supply side in the economy in this Report; one is
Alex Brummer, Daily Mail:Page 3 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14that there is more slack than we had previously thought. Because of the labour market we see higher rates of participation in the economy for various reasons which we can discuss. And we also see a lower medium term equilibrium rate of unemployment, how fast the economy can run a given level of unemployment and keeping inflation on target, so we have both of those adjustments.That's consistent with a labour supply shock to the economy and there is a process as that labour supply shock is absorbed that businesses have been hiring, the price of labour hasn't been moving up as you see with the wage data over the course of the last year; so businesses have substituted labour for capital.Now eventually that additional labour supply gets absorbed, real wages start to pick up, businesses invest more, productivity starts to pick up in response to investment; but it's just a slower process in part because of the adjustment.But I would - and then I'll finish with this, is just to reemphasise that actually the adjustment we've made on the labour side, our expectation - our view on how much spare capacity there is in the labour market, is not something - I'll put it in the negative, is not something that suggests that there's any structural break in the productivity potential of this economy; it's something that has to do with the timing in terms of the recovery. And, as you do see, we do have a pickup in investment; we have relatively strong investment growth over the forecast, consistent with that.You referred in your opening remarks to geopolitical risks having increased, and I just wondered how great a risk the MPC sees those geopolitical risks at the moment, which seem to be rising by the day? And secondly, whether that will have any influence you think on the long term direction of interest rates and your attitude towards raising interest rates?
Mark Carney:Simon Jack, BBC News:Page 4 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14Well let me say a couple of things. In terms of the forecast we have a slight downside skew to our growth forecast, I'd quote the numbers if I - and actually I neglected to mention the 3.5% forecast for 2014, but it's in the Report, which is slightly firmer than we had in May. That's our central expectation. There is some downside risk and most of the downside risks come from abroad, potential tightening of global financial conditions which I mentioned, but also as you raised these geopolitical tensions.Now, it has not influenced the policy, it's something we discuss and take into account, but it hasn't determined the policy decision. And, as you say, some of these situations are evolving relatively rapidly. We have to look at the channels back to the UK economy, whether they're through potentially higher commodity prices, potentially through demand for our exports, and potentially through risk premia globally.We haven't seen the first; we've seen relatively little evidence of the last, markets have been remarkably resilient to some of these geopolitical events. And we're only beginning to see the first advance signs of the middle, through some of our major export markets, such as Germany and the movements in some of the confidence indicators. So I would say it's early days, but it's something we obviously have to monitor and if it becomes an important determinant obviously we'll talk more directly to it.You say there's less slack in the economy than you previously thought, down to 1%, that we're using up slack in the labour market more quickly than you previously thought, but wages are sort of bafflingly weak. I just wonder whether you will try and get ahead of the curve - you know you've placed a lot of emphasis on wages, will you get ahead of the curve on wage growth or will you wait until it shows up, what will be the trigger when it comes to wages?
Mark Carney:Page 5 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14Well there are two things, just to recap in our views on slack. The first is that, as you say, and as I said, the slack has been used up more rapidly than we had previously expected, that's right. But we took a signal from the degree of participation in the economy, the participation figures, but also the degrees of transition of longer term, medium term unemployed into jobs, but also importantly from wage data as well. We took signals from all of those factors to suggest that the starting point for the degree of slack was greater than we previously had thought.So the combination of being used up more rapidly, and a different starting point than we detailed - all of those adjustments in the Report, leaves us with, in our best judgement, our best collective judgement, a slight narrowing of the degree of slock.Now, this is the point where I have to say there is tremendous uncertainty around that best collective judgement. I quote the Committee's view of 1%, there's a wide range of views, and there's - even around the wide range of point views there would be quite a wide dispersion of possible outcomes on the degree of slack in the labour market. So we will be learning as we go, as we have learned, and we will update as we go.That means that we're not putting out a threshold, as you wouldn't expect, you wouldn’t expect us to have a single point threshold for some magic number of average weekly earnings, private sector, public sector, total economy - that would unlock the moment when we adjusted rates. We have to look at the prospects for wage growth, and then the prospects for the productivity recovery that Ben asked about, and therefore unit labour costs, and ultimately for inflation.
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mark Carney:Page 6 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14Now is not the time, given the degree of slack, given the weakness of wages, and given the start of some of the recovery of productivity. But over the forecast horizon, in our best view that time will come, and there would be an upward adjustment in interest rates. But we're going to have to continue to monitor the labour market very carefully.Can I just pick out a couple of things that you say in the overview, which you say that there's a wide range of views on the Committee about the likely degree of slack, more uncertainty about the health of the housing market than three months ago, that wages may go up, but they may not go up and that right at the end you say that the Committee's guidance on the likely pace and extent of interest rate rises is an expectation not a promise.I mean once you cut through all this doesn't it lead you to three conclusions - one, that the Bank hasn't really got a clue what's going on out there; two, that the MPC is divided about what's going on out there; and that thirdly, any person thinking about taking out a mortgage or an overdraft on the basis of the Bank's forward guidance would be ill-advised to do so, because anything you say has to be taken with a very large pinch of salt?Thank you Larry for that generous question. Let's take that in reverse order. Look, the Committee's guidance is consistent, it's unchanged, it's been the same guidance since February, since we put in place the second phase of guidance. And developments in this economy, developments in the global economy, developments in financial markets have all been consistent - consistent with that guidance.Now it's a call, it's a view, it's an expectation, it's a judgement of the Committee, but it's an important judgement. And the judgement is about the likely path of interest rates, over the medium term, that interest rates can
Ben Broadbent:Page 7 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14be expected to go up as the expansion progresses, but they'll go up to a limited extent and they will go up gradually.Now a household making a decision about borrowing that's relevant, it's relevant that interest rates are going to be higher, it's relevant that interest rates are not going to - or in our expectation they're not going to move sharply higher. It's very relevant for businesses, I recommend you go and talk to a wide range of businesses about whether that is useful information for them in terms of their adjustments, their investments, their hiring decisions. I find that it is actually quite useful.Now, it's not a guarantee, it's not a guarantee. Alex rightly asks about geopolitical events, there are events, there are things that can happen, there are situations that we could have to respond to in order to meet our mandate, which is a 2% inflation target. But the broad thrust of that guidance is there and the Committee is behind it.In terms of the judgements about when to raise interest rates and the role that developments in the labour market, developments in productivity play in that - look there is a lot of uncertainty about that. There has been record job growth, record participation in the economy, and a - I'll check with Ben here my superlatives, but a relatively unprecedented weakness in wages, certainly given those other performance metrics. And reasonable people are going to take different judgements about those, particularly as the degree of slack, as big as it has been, the degree of slack is increasingly used up. And that's what you would expect from a Committee, so Ben I don't know if you want to ...No nothing more, except to say that I think it's a - I mean it's a tempting one, but it's a false dichotomy, is it not, to say that either you're completely certain of everything or you're clueless. The fact is we are uncertain, but there are, you
Chris Choi, ITV News:Mark Carney:Page 8 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14know, substantive reasons for giving the guidance about future interest rates we have. And while one can't be completely precise or make that guidance unconditionally there are nonetheless good reasons for saying what we've said.And as for slack, you know the truth is we're confronted with these two very contrasting signals from the labour market, strong quantities and weak wages. And of course blending them is going to give you a slightly more uncertain outcome as to the extent of labour market slack than would otherwise be the case. But that's not the same thing as saying we're clueless.Of course so many households are feeling tremendous anxiety at the prospect of a rate rise at the moment, and alongside that is the real wage situation in many of those homes. This morning there are new figures indicating that average salaries actually went down in the year to June. Now in your Report today you're talking about some signs that new recruits are getting better wage settlements. Is there a danger here that you'll be setting policy geared towards the lucky workers who are in sought after professions in key areas, leaving aside the vast majority who've got no decent wage settlements?Okay, well Chris a very important question. Something else that we highlight - and this is something we're very attuned to and I referenced it in my opening remarks about the sensitivity of the economy to interest rate increases and particularly given household finances, the debt overhang, the need to rebuilt pensions, concerns about debt servicing. We conduct a survey, along with NMG, of households, British households and we quote in the Report that around - well actually the majority of households would, in the absence of wage increases find difficulties in, or would have to take
Kathryn Hopkins, The Times:Mark Carney:Page 9 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14significant expenditure adjustments if there were a 2% point increase in interest rates at that point.Now that's in the absence of wage increases. So there is this sensitivity that is there, that exists and we do take it into account. It's one of the reasons why - one of the reasons why one would expect interest rate increases, once they begin, to move gradually.But to your specific question, is there a danger of us targeting policy to, in your words, the lucky few, or specific sectors? No, there's not a danger - we make monetary policy for the economy as a whole, we look at the labour market as a whole, we look at a broad range of inflationary pressures. And I'll finish by saying that, you know, we will do two things - one we're looking at prospective wages, not for the lucky few but across the economy; we're very conscious about this debt issue and the sensitivity to interest rate increases. But then lastly, we - our contribution in terms of real earnings, our ultimate contribution is to deliver low, stable, predictable inflation, 2% inflation target. And we'll remain resolutely focused on doing that in as timely a fashion as is appropriate.There have been some signs in the last couple of weeks that the Financial Conduct Authority's new rules on borrowing may not have dampened the market anywhere near as people originally thought. Do you think you'll have to take more action in the future if there are further signs of an overheating housing market?Well Kathryn, these are the mortgage market review rules to which you're referring, right, the so called MMR rules. Let me say what the MPC's perspective on those has been. On balance we viewed that the implementation of the MMR rules contributed to a slowing in the housing market, a slowing in housing market activity, fewer mortgage approvals, fewer transactions than would have otherwise been the case. And
Jonathan Ferro, Bloomberg Television:Mark Carney:Page 10 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14that this was largely - largely a transitional factor risk because of the impact on the lending capacity of banks and building societies as they got up to speed with the new rules, so effectively it's a transition.There were some early signs that that transition process is nearing its end. But all that said we still have lowered overall our expectations for the number of approvals and the number of transactions for the year.I'm a bit loath to drift into FPC territory, except to say that the FPC's view of the implications of the MMR rules was entirely consistent with the MPC's view. So that these were largely transitional, that they enhanced the underwriting standards in the mortgage market, but they were not viewed as something that was going to permanently slow activity going forward, it was just going to be higher quality activity and higher quality underwriting.Governor Carney, I think 90% of people will leave this Report today thinking, there's no wage growth, there's no hike coming any time soon. But you've also raised your outlook for growth; you're looking for 3.5% this year. How do you reconcile 3.5% GDP growth with record low interest rates? And is there a risk that this Central Bank is putting too much emphasis on a 25 basis point rise in rates and not the absolute level, 3.5% and 1% interest rates I'm sure in your mind would still be accommodative, what are your thoughts?A couple of things, first off you're the one putting tremendous emphasis, collectively, on one move in rates, you know that's the great focus - is when is the Bank going to move the first time? What we're putting emphasis on, and I know it's boring and repetitive and it doesn't clip into a new headline, we're focusing on the path, the likely path of rates, the limited and gradual adjustment in those rates over the
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mark Carney:Page 11 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14medium term, because of the headwinds that are facing this economy.And you're right, we have a 3.5% growth rate this year, we have a slowing, even consistent with the market curve that has a tightening of monetary policy over the next three years, we have a slowing in the rate of growth, and we have inflation running close to, but below - but below the target until the very end of the forecast horizon.Now there's a variety of factors. But I'll remind you that we're an inflation targeting Central Bank, we have a very clear mandate and this is about achieving our mandate. And we've got the headwinds that I referenced, including from a mechanical perspective, but it's relevant to households, it may be mechanical but it's relative to households, the pass through from a 14% appreciation in our currency on a trade weighted basis that's happened over the last year and we're only just starting to see the adjustment to CPI that comes through lower import prices from that. So that's one of many ways we can reconcile what we're doing.Governor, would you care to give any comment on the appropriateness or otherwise of the market expectations for interest rates?Well, not on the - I'm not going to give a comment on the precise timing of any adjustment, we've said that that decision, the decision around the first move in interest rates will be driven by the data. We obviously didn't take that decision last week, there'll be more data to come, more evolution of the economy and we'll make the judgement in the context of that.What I'll reemphasise though in terms of overall, the overall shape of market expectations, as I said in my opening statement is those overall expectations are consistent with an
Szu Chan, The Telegraph:Mark Carney:Matthew Holehouse, Daily Telegraph:Page 12 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14adjustment in the path of policy that is both gradual and limited, and in our best collective judgement that path is consistent with achieving the inflation target over the forecast horizon.Just to pick up on that point, I mean you keep on saying the path of interest rates will be gradual and limited, I think we've got a good idea of what limited means, could you expand a bit more on what gradual means. I noted in your opening remarks you talked about a 15 basis point rate hike, so that's what the market has priced in. Is that a view that you endorse and could you see a scenario where you lifted rates by 12.5 basis points, or would that be too much akin to sort of slow boiling a frog?Slow boiling the frog, slow boiling the inflation frog. Ben this sounds one that's just right up your alley with the twist at the end there Szu.Look, the Committee is not endorsing a specific - the general, I apologise Szu, I'm going to stick to my answer that I just gave to Ed, in terms of the general shape of that path. I mean this 15 basis points is bounced around, it was 20 basis points I think last quarter, that was the market expectation of the last Inflation Report in terms of the relative pace of rate increases. And I think the broad point - what's important is the broad point will determine the precise path as we go.Governor, I was wondering if I could ask you about your latest thinking on Scotland. In January you told us that a successful currency union could only happen with the seeding of some sovereignty, since then there has been much political debate and the three unionist parties have made it clear that they don't think that could happen. Do you think that a currency union is now likely with an independent Scotland
Mark Carney:James Mackintosh, Financial Times:Page 13 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14and is it time for Alex Salmond to produce a plan B on currency?Well we don't get a vote in this and we don't want a vote in this, just to be clear. We have, the Bank has operational independence in the conduct of monetary policy, others, that is elected officials, make the decision, the decisions about our remit, our mandate, they will make the decisions about the currency if the currency for - whether or not there is a currency union between the rest of the UK and an independent Scotland in the event that there were a yes vote in the referendum.We do take note of the decisions of the three main Westminster parties to rule out a currency union, but I'll reiterate that we'll implement whatever we're asked to implement. And I'll add further, if I may, that we also have responsibilities, as you know, for financial stability in the United Kingdom and we will continue to discharge those responsibilities until they change. We'll continue to discharge those responsibilities regardless of the outcome of the vote on the 18th of September.Just to come to Ben's dichotomy between the total certainty and the being completely clueless. It would appear that if you take this instead as a spectrum that you've been moving over the past five years from a fair degree of certainty towards a fair degree of cluelessness, constant changes to the models, regular reassessments of the principles behind your view of how the labour markets work and what drives inflation.As that happens does that imply that you also reassess your level of certainty about how you now think things work, that you accept that you are further towards the cluelessness end
Mark Carney:Page 14 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14of the spectrum and that therefore you should adopt more of a wait and see approach and be slower to raise rates than you otherwise might be, purely because of that uncertainty?Well, can we agree that the spectrum is between perfect certainty and uncertainty, as opposed to that other term that you used. But the - let me start and then I’ll pass to Ben. Five years, six years ago, immediately at the start of the great recession, immediate aftermath of the financial crisis, huge shock obviously, demand shock, big risk of hysteresis in this economy, big risk that sharp increase in unemployment would become quasi permanent even as demand recovered, because individuals would become detached from the labour force, their skills would atrophy, they would exit, they would give up to some extent.Now, that hasn’t been what the British worker has done. What we have seen is that unlike in some other major advanced economies, we have seen actually a higher attachment to the labour force, there's a variety of potential reasons for that, I won’t go into them right now, but a higher attachment to the labour force. People have gone out and they’ve looked for work. They’re looking for more work than they have. There’s still a relatively high level of involuntary part time workers. And so we have learned with that process.And we have been looking at this issue of how much of a labour supply shock, not whether we had a labour supply shock, but how much of a labour supply shock we’ve had over the course, at least certainly over the course of my time here and predating that. And so we’re updated on that.The uncertainty is not a reason for a stasis though. We do have to make judgements. There is a lot of uncertainty around the level of slack in the economy, but we have made a judgement, we have a best collective judgement of the MPC
James Mackintosh, Financial Times:Mark Carney:Ben Broadbent:David Smith, Sunday Times:Page 15 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14of what that level of slack is, and that does have some implication for policy. It’s not the determinant of it but it does have implications so we’re able to deal with that uncertainty and manage policy with it. But Ben, please.[No microphone - inaudible question]Well that’s, you know - James, you really think you’re going to get more than implications for policy after we’ve just made a decision?The only thing I’d add is that I would draw a distinction between having become less certain about ‘how things work’, and becoming less certain about what will happen. And I don’t think we’ve been revising our models greatly, that’s not the case. And I don’t think given the events we’ve had, and in particular given the behaviour of productivity, we’ve been that surprised. Over the last few months we have been surprised by the weakness of wages, but it’s not the case that we’ve overhauled our models, our entire framework for thinking.If one had to pick out one thing about which we have become much less certain about, which one could only become less certain, it is the behaviour of productivity growth and supply generally. And it was perfectly reasonable, having been confronted with decades of relatively stable growth, what one now sees to have been relatively stable growth of supply, and having had instead five years in which to all intents and purposes labour productivity hasn’t grown at all, to have become more uncertain about the future. That would be the only possible response. But I don’t think it’s the case that the entire framework has had to be revised.Governor, you've talked about the headwinds to growth and that being a reason for rates to be lower than was the historic norm, even when they begin to rise. The Report says that for
Mark Carney:Page 16 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14the next few years, even when growth slows from its current pace, the MPC expects it to be close to its historic average, is that - would you say that’s healthy growth when it’s only achieved alongside, for a time, negative real interest rates and even when they rise possibly zero real interest rates, is that healthy and sustainable growth? Or is there a danger of unbalanced growth even though it’s close to its historic average in terms of the numbers?Well first thing, I know you know this, but just so we’re absolutely clear, it’s growth that would not be achieved, in our judgement, if we didn’t provide or if we didn’t maintain a relatively low level of interest rates.Now part of the question, to get slightly technical with you and then I’ll get back to your question, but part of the question is how stimulative is the current low levels of interest rates, because that’s partly a product, and we discussed it in the Report, it’s partly a product of where the equilibrium level of interest rates are at this point.Now there's a variety of factors that influence that and I won’t bore you with them because it’s great bedtime reading. But it’s, you know, half a percent today is less stimulative than half a percent prior to the crisis because that equilibrium level of interest rate, in our judgement, has changed, okay, would be the first point.But your question is about the sustainability of growth, the healthiness of the growth. Let me say a couple of things. One is that actually thus far growth has been relatively broad based. This is not a debt fuelled consumption recovery. The recovery element wasn’t that; there was a pickup in investment that we had expected and did come through. Households have been reducing their savings rate, something they can’t do forever but they have been reducing their savings rate as opposed to sharply increasing their borrowing
William James, Reuters:Mark Carney:Page 17 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14to fund consumption. And we actually have had some contribution, up until very recently, from the external side on the net trade side.The sustainability of that going forward, again if there's - to pick up on Ben’s last answer, if there's one uncertainty it’s around the productivity performance, and about when that productivity performance turns, how rapidly it picks up. If there's one big issue, if I could pick one big issue about the sustainability of that recovery it is the extent to which productivity does pick up.We have lowered the bar quite a bit in our forecast to Ben’s original question; we’ve dropped our productivity forecast down a fair bit over the forecast horizon. But we still need to see that come through to feed the wages that will finance the consumption and that will - and just to be consistent, that is with the business investment which makes that path of growth more sustainable, healthy in your term. But I wouldn’t, just to finish, I wouldn’t be definitive that this is a healthy, sustainable path of growth. It’s still part of a transition to a more balanced economy.You gave markets a bit of jolt in June with your Mansion House speech, suggesting that perhaps they weren’t reacting to the markets - the data flow. Now that there's been a bit of volatility, expectations are roughly where they were at that time, I'm interested in do you think markets are reacting better now to the data flow than they were?Yeah, thank you for the question because it’s framed quite frankly in the right way, which is the market reaction to the data flow. And what we’ve seen since Mansion House is that market reactions to economic surprises, particularly economic surprises in the UK, have moved back to their historic averages, around their historic averages. So if you look at one year, one year forward, interest rates as one proxy for
Kamal Ahmed, BBC:Mark Carney:Page 18 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14that, those reactions, to good or bad surprises, have been more consistent with the reactions we saw prior to the financial crisis. So it came from extremely low levels up - now a relatively limited period of time.So it’s less about the precise timing and expectations of markets. I couldn’t pick a certain month as the right answer, we don’t know what - you know we haven’t taken that decision, we don’t know what the answer ultimately will be in terms of when that first rate rise happens, except to underscore that that’s less important unless you’re trading short sterling, less important to people in the real economy. But we will be following the data and updating based on it, and we’re encouraged, I'm encouraged, to see that the market is increasingly doing that.Governor, can I take you back to your answers on Scotland and two connected issues there. Firstly I hear obviously what you say about you will implement whatever the politicians and the process decides, but I wonder what your thoughts were on the issue of sterlingisation, obviously the use of sterling without a formal currency union, is that sustainable for a sovereign nation in the long term?And then on your second point about reassurance, UBS has warned about deposit flights in the event of a yes vote for Scottish independence. I wondered if that’s a risk that you are aware of, and do you feel that it’s necessary to reassure people that the Bank of England still stands behind all UK banks wherever they may be domiciled, whatever the outcome of a referendum?In terms of the sustainability or not of various currency arrangements, I did give a speech at the start of the year in Edinburgh which outlined, in my view, the main determinants of the viability of successful currency arrangements. And not to go through all the detail, it’s still available online, the
Page 19 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14components are free movement of bonus of production capital labour and a banking union, a form of banking union, and lastly some form of fiscal arrangements. All of those components contribute to currency arrangements that are viable over the medium term.I’ll let others judge. The very clear intent was to lay out the economics of this and let others judge whether plans put forward were consistent with that. And I'm not going to provide that judgement today. I didn’t provide the judgement then and I don’t think it’s appropriate to provide it today.In terms of the financial stability questions, I’ll reiterate that whatever happens in the vote, the Bank of England will be the continuing authority for financial stability for some period of time, certainly over the interim period. And we will look to discharge our responsibilities accordingly.Uncertainty about the currency arrangements could raise financial stability issues. We will, as you would expect us to have contingency plans for various possibilities, possibilities that could relate and I’ll broaden this to issues that Alex Brummer raised earlier globally, issues in financial markets that Minouche and her colleagues look at, issues such as could be related to Scotland. So we have contingency plans that we develop.It’s never a good idea to talk about contingency plans in public other than to assure people that we have contingency plans. And I’d just underscore that in terms of our responsibilities for financial stability, we do have a wide range of tools and plans. We are not the only authority that has responsibility for financial stability, and some of the things that we - some of the powers that we have are held jointly with Her Majesty’s Treasury, so we’re not the sole decision maker in these areas.
Emma Charlton, Bloomberg News:Mark Carney:Asa Bennett, Huffington Post:Mark Carney:Page 20 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14How critical is it to start earlier with rate increases if you do intend to commit or you do intend to be gradual and limited? And if spare capacity is being used up more quickly than you thought and you’ve said the recovery is sustainable, doesn’t that argue for going earlier to enable this gradual and limited path?Well it’s - I’ll just put it in context. Current market expectations are 15 basis points a quarter and climbing up to two and a quarter basis points in three years from now. So I mean theoretically yes, but if you put it in the broader context this is an argument on the margin as opposed to a decisive one.The decision of the Committee in August was not to move Bank Rate. The message we’re giving is that economic momentum is increasingly assured; expansion is continuing, individuals, whether they’re in the market or most importantly in the real economy, can expect Bank Rate to rise, but once they do that they will be limited and gradual. But you know, precise jumping around on timing, your point is conceptually correct but obviously not decisive for the MPC at this juncture.I just wanted to ask Governor about the evolution of your forward guidance plan, particularly when it started with the sort of clear to understand unemployment threshold, and then the sort of output gap, and then this bolt on was a look at pay growth. Do you wish you started with this at the beginning? Hasn’t it all been a bit of a muddle or is it a learning process?Well you’re muddled I'm afraid. We have two phases of forward guidance that we’ve given. The first phase exactly as you describe, 7% unemployment threshold, given at a point
Page 21 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14where we thought that there was considerable excess supply in the economy. We didn’t know exactly how much and we didn’t know the components, but we felt very comfortable with that.In February we put in place the next phase and that next phase, as I said in this statement, as we said in our last minutes, as we said in our previous minutes, as we said in the May Inflation Report, as we said in the April minutes, as we said in the March minutes, as we said in the February Inflation Report and the February minutes, that guidance is entirely consistent.First and foremost it’s about the path for rate increases. I know it’s dull, I know it’s repetitive, but that’s the problem with consistency, it’s dull and repetitive. It’s limited and gradual over the horizon; it’s guidance about what we would do with our asset purchase facility that we will continue to reinvest until rates increase, at least until rates increase. And we further - the only modification we’ve given is to further refine that to say explicitly that markets should expect that we wouldn’t begin to actively sell gilts until we had moved Bank Rate materially such that we could rely on further reductions in Bank Rate if we needed to provide stimulus in the future.In terms of decisions around when we start that path of limited and gradual increases, yes it’s affected by the degree of slack in the labour market. There are various components that determine that. It’s affected by other factors that influence the outlook for inflation. And we go through those in detail and we admit when we’ve gotten things wrong in the past and when we’ve updated our views, but that’s not new guidance. And we’re not walking in here today and saying we are getting - in fact I explicitly said wages, while important, are not a threshold for policy. I can’t be any clearer than
Catherine Boyle, CNBC:Mark Carney:Nick Cecil, Evening Standard:Page 22 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14that, even in anticipation of a question such as your own. So it’s consistent, it’s boring, but that’s what you get.Given everything that’s been said today about wage growth and productivity, do you still think the housing market is the greatest risk for the UK’s economic recovery?Well I think the - thank you Catherine. The risk around the housing market in the judgement of the FPC, implicit by the MPC as well, but this is a medium term risk to the recovery. So in many respects what the FPC was doing when it took the steps a few months ago was acting to reduce a risk that could materialise beyond the forecast horizon of the MPC. In other words an excessive build-up of debt that ultimately caused difficulties with the financial system, but really as the big issue that it further increased the debt overhang of British households such that when a slowdown came that slowdown was amplified and amplified into recession. So that’s what the FPC did.The key judgement that the MPC had to take or a judgement that the MPC had to take in this report and with this forecast was did the FPC’s actions affect our central forecast as the MPC for the economy? And the answer is no.Now that was an independent judgement of the MPC. It’s not entirely surprising that the MPC took that judgement because as you would expect, you know as citizens would expect, the MPC and the FPC talk to each other. This is a big issue for the UK economy. We had a number of meetings, we shared analysis, we had joint discussions, and so the FPC’s decisions were informed by the likely view - the likely view of the MPC.Can I just take you back to your comment about gradual and limited rate increases? You’re stressing that that’s not a promise, are you just giving yourself a little bit of wriggle
Mark Carney:Nick Cecil, Evening Standard: Mark Carney:John Boyd, World Business Press:Page 23 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14room and how should people considering taking out a mortgage interpret that?Well a couple of things. One is in terms of people taking out a mortgage what we’ve already done as the Bank, as the FPC, is to actually take that issue away in terms of the qualification for the mortgage because now for every underwriting lenders are to take into account a 3% increase in Bank Rate. That was one of the decisions of the FPC in June, and that is implemented through the FCA and the PRA. So lenders are supposed to adjust for a world where rates are higher, okay.Now of course it’s better for individuals to also adjust to that, and the main thing for individuals we want to get across is yes, do expect that there's going to be some increase in interest rates, certainly over the life of the mortgage but also over the course of the next three years which is our forecast horizon. And we’re giving our best guidance that we can at this stage.[No microphone - inaudible question.]It’s not; it is a pithier way of saying what we’ve been saying all along. It’s not - there's not news in that. Just more clippable if that makes sense.We talk about 800,000 new jobs created in the past year, at least people out of unemployment, but there's very little talk about the ratio of self employed in that where it’s grown maybe 4.5 times faster than people - regular employees. And if it’s already 14% of the labour force and rising constantly, are we not worried a little that we’re heading towards like in Italy for instance they have 23%, and if a lot of the self-employed are not actually full self-employed like some of the trade unions are claiming, where employers pass
Mark Carney:John Boyd, World Business Press:Mark Carney:Ben Broadbent:Page 24 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14the burden of contributions to the employees and this is stifling wage growth and possibly productivity also?I'm going to ask Ben to pick this up, but let me just correct one thing if I may, which is that yes there has been an increase in self-employment in recent years. Actually what hasn’t been the case, in the most recent labour market reports the proportions of self-employment has been lower than it had been prior, so it’s not steadily increasing, there's actually more full time employment being created ...The second quarter of 2014 it was 9.7% for self-employed.Look, it’s higher than historically but it’s not - you said steadily increasing and it’s not steadily increasing. But within that context this is something we have looked at, its implications potentially for wage pressures. Also its implication for productivity which I wouldn’t summarise as quickly as you did, that it’s necessarily bad for productivity. In fact there's good arguments to go the other way.No, that’s all I was going to say. Just on the point of the changes. I think you were quoting the figure for the growth over the past year for the second quarter. The Governor was talking about growth between the first and second quarters where it did actually fall as a proportion.Truthfully we don’t know that much about how or even whether the self-employed differ greatly from those in employment. The only thing I was going to add which I think what the Governor was going to add is that these are, many of them, the small businesses that we think generate productivity growth. So it’s not at all clear to me that a greater share is bad for productivity. I don’t think we know anything like enough to say that’s true.
James Salmon, Daily Mail:Mark Carney:Page 25 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14I apologise for asking the same question in a slightly different way, but given you've said in the past that interest rates could rise sooner than expected, and you've also said that you’d be guided by the data, could you just spell out for us whether this latest data makes an interest rate rise this year, as some people have talked about, less or more likely?That’s a very pointed question James. It’s a pointed question to which I'm not going to give a direct answer because - in part because I don’t know. I'm one member of this Committee. We have taken a decision on rates; we just took a decision on rates. We’re going to do what we said which is continue to follow the data and its implications for activity and most importantly for inflation, and then decide accordingly in coming meetings.The most recent data - look we’re getting conflicting - there are conflicting signals in the labour market as talked about at length in the Report. Quantity is up very strongly, lots of employment, very sharp increase in hours worked, more people coming into the labour market, so we have on that side, and then on the other side very weak wage growth in that context. And as a consequence unit labour cost growth in this economy year on year, even with weak productivity, is basically flat. Basically flat, so there's no unit labour cost growth, which is of course relevant for the outlook for inflation.But we’re also seeing, as I said at the very outset of my remarks, a little more momentum in the economy than we had expected. And we take a judgement from a series of reports, both hard reports, hard data, and survey data, that the momentum that is in the economy is more assured. Yes, we expect it to slow somewhat towards the end of the year and into next year, but this is an expansion which has momentum and we expect it to continue. So we have to take all of those things together in making our judgements. We
Jenny Scott: Sam Fleming, FT:Mark Carney:Minouche Shafik:Page 26 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14just took a judgement; we’ll take another one in September, another one in October etc, etc.Last question, Sam.One on the overseas outlook and particularly the Euro area. What kind of impact are you factoring in from monetary policy decisions being made by the ECB at the moment? Are you expecting these to bear fruit, because certainly the impact so far has been pretty disappointing especially on the inflation/deflation front?Well let me say one word and I'm going to ask Minouche to amplify. I think that in your question, Sam, you reference the most recent actions of the ECB, and I would caution between looking for immediate impact of the most recent actions of the ECB. Not to overplay it but there is a real analogy between what the ECB has done and the Funding for Lending scheme of the Bank of England.Partly you get some things in expectations, but actually you need the mechanics of the scheme to move forward. And so the LTRO mechanism is really only going to start running - it’s their programme, not mine, but it’s going to take some time for it to start having an impact. And I think President Draghi was very clear about that when he made the announcements. And so we can - this could have a potentially large impact but one wouldn’t expect it to be coincident. But maybe more broadly on just our outlook on Europe and where it looks, Minouche do you want to amplify?Sure. I think as said in the Inflation Report, the prospects continue to be for fairly low growth and low inflation in the eurozone. And I think as the Governor has said I think we need to still see whether the ECB’s measures contribute to stronger credit growth and recovery in the period ahead.
Jenny Scott:ENDPage 27 Inflation Report Q&A - 13-08-14But I think the implications for the UK are that we can’t really rely on robust growth in the eurozone to support our own recovery. Obviously the US recovery is a bit stronger, but that’s why the recovery in domestic demand is an important part of the recovery that we see in the UK. And of course it would be good for us if Europe grew faster since it’s our key trading market, but for the near term that doesn’t look very likely.Okay, that’s all we’ve got time for. Thanks very much everyone.