INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 15 February 2012 Opening Remarks by the GovernorSince we last met, CPI inflation has fallen sharply. From its peak of 5.2% in September, inflation has already fallen half way back towards the 2% target. These remain, though, challenging times for the UK economy. Substantial headwinds are hampering our recovery and rebalancing. Today’s Report explains that further falls in inflation are in prospect as the effect of external factors wanes, and a weak near-term growth outlook adds to the margin of slack in the economy. Nevertheless, growth is likely to recover gradually, supported by rising real incomes and the additional stimulus provided by the asset purchases announced last week.The ONS estimates that the economy contracted slightly in the final quarter of 2011, completing a year in which growth disappointed. And the figures released this morning show that the unemployment rate is now 8.4%. Although some recent business surveys suggest a brighter picture for activity at the beginning of this year, the fiscal consolidation and tight credit conditions at home, and the weakness of our major overseas trading partners, are acting as a drag on growth. The underlying need for repair of balance sheets means that the path of recovery is likely to be slow and uncertain. For much of this year, there is likely to be a “zig- zag” pattern of alternating positive and negative quarterly growth rates reflecting the additional Bank Holiday for the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee, so that it will be harder than usual to interpret the official estimates of growth.The Committee’s judgement about the outlook for four-quarter GDP growth is summarised in Chart 1 on page 6 of the Report. It is based on the assumptions that Bank Rate follows a path implied by market interest rates, and that the size of the asset purchase programme remains at £325 billion. The outlook for growth is broadly similar to that in November. Weakness in the near-term is followed by a recovery to rates of growth close to long-run averages by the end of the second year of the projection. That recovery is driven by rising real incomes and a pick-up
2in investment from its current low levels. The biggest risk to the recovery stems from developments in the euro area, where there remain concerns about the indebtedness and competitiveness of some member countries. As in the August and November Inflation Reports, the Committee has judged that there is no meaningful way to quantify the most extreme outcomes associated with developments in the euro area, and they are therefore excluded from the fan charts.Inflation fell back in January to 3.6%, as the increase in VAT last year dropped out of the twelve-month comparison. It is likely to fall further in the near term as the contribution of past rises in energy and import prices diminishes, and unemployment and spare capacity bear down on wages and prices. But the degree of underlying inflationary pressure, once the effect of energy and import prices on inflation subsides, depends upon productivity growth, the degree to which slack in the labour market restrains wage growth, and the pace at which firms will rebuild their squeezed profit margins. Each of those is impossible to judge with any certainty. Disruptions to the supply of oil, for example from Iran or Nigeria, would pose an upside risk to the inflation outlook.Chart 3, on page 8 of the Report, shows the Committee's best collective judgement of the outlook for CPI inflation. It is based on the same assumptions about monetary policy as underlie Chart 1. The shape of the outlook is similar to that in our November Report, although inflation is now expected to be a little higher throughout, reflecting the looser stance of monetary policy and some increase in oil and commodity prices. Nevertheless, the Committee judges that inflation is more likely to be below the target than above it for a good part of the three-year forecast period. By the end of that period, the risks around the inflation outlook, relative to the target, are judged to be broadly balanced.The story that inflation would be high in the near term but eventually fall back has been a feature of the past six Inflation Reports. We can take some reassurance from the fact that inflation is now falling. But we are still steering a course through choppy waters, and many people are experiencing difficult times. Many savers continue to receive negligible returns on their savings. Over a million more people are out of work than was the case four years ago.
3And those who are working have seen the purchasing power of their pay sharply reduced. These are the consequences of the painful adjustment prompted by the financial crisis, and the need to rebalance our economy. Unfortunately there is no easy remedy. We all want to return to a world with a more normal level of interest rates. But if we were to raise interest rates to such a level now, that would serve only to turn a gradual recovery into a recession, put more people out of work, and cut the value of assets on which many savers depend.Moving to a world of steady growth, inflation close to our 2% target, and a more normal level of interest rates, will take time. There is a limit to what monetary policy can achieve when real adjustments are required. But with falling inflation, and the prospect of an end to the squeeze in real incomes leading to a recovery in growth, we are moving in the right direction.