Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 15th February 2012
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Linda Yueh, Bloomberg TV:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012Many of the finance ministers in the eurozone are putting out statements suggesting that they're now better prepared for a possible Greek default. Would you say that Britain and our financial system is prepared?I don't think anyone can be fully prepared for what will be unforeseeable consequences if such an event were to occur. I'm not going to speculate on the probabilities of that sort of event. All I will say is that, as you would have expected, both the government and the Bank together - and I'm sure the financial sector - have been considering a range of possible outcomes and making contingency plans. But I'm not going to go into detail on that.Governor, can I point you to page 11 of the Report where money growth you say was weak in the fourth quarter. In fact it's the first quarterly fall in the stock of money since the third quarter of 2009.Now given that you launched another round of quantitative easing or asset purchases since we last met in November, but also you had launched another round of asset purchases, also last autumn, does the fall in the amount of credit in the economy imply that you haven't done enough QE?No, because if we believed that, then we would have obviously done more last week when we met. I think we look quite carefully at this number and there are possible explanations relating to the behaviour of the financial sector which mean that it won't carry through to the first or second quarters of this year. So we shall have to see whether this represents, you know, a more worrying trend.But there's no doubt that one of the main objectives of asset purchase is clearly to inject more money into the economy,
Linda Yueh, Bloomberg TV:Mervyn King:Sam Fleming, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012because our concern was not that there was too much money in the economy, leading to inflation, but too little.And that's been our concern right through the last two or three years, which is why we've engaged in a programme of asset purchases, and this number was indeed one of the factors that we took into account when making our decision.But as with any quarterly number it's, I think, dangerous to put far too much weight on any one quarterly figure, and we wait to see what happens in the next quarter or two.But, Governor, does it imply that you're not buying the right things? Should you be buying gilts or perhaps other types of assets?I think on the grounds of incentive, let's let someone else ask that question, shall we?You alluded in your opening statement to the position of savers, which is obviously something which is of huge concern at the moment - not only low interest rates and the impact on returns on deposit accounts, but also the impact of QE on pension scheme deficits and annuities. I just wondered if you're concerned the Bank is sending out a message at the moment that it's not worth saving?No, we're not sending out any such message at all, and indeed you can see that households believe that it is, because their savings have gone up, not gone done. One of the reasons for slow growth in the last year was weakness of consumer spending and higher savings by households.I have deep sympathy with those who are totally unconnected with the origins of this crisis, who suddenly find that the returns on
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012their savings have reached, as I said, negligible levels. The question is - what is the right reaction to that? What shall we do about it? Well, we could put up interest rates to 4%, 5% and then maybe the return on savings would appear to go up. But I'm absolutely confident that, if we were to do that, you would see that the value of assets, all financial assets would go down; that there would be a sharp rise in the exchange rate; that investment in consumer spending would fall; we would go back into a recession. And I think that many savers would find that the value of their wealth would fall more than enough to offset the apparently higher yield. And everyone would be worse off.So, difficult though it is, I think what we have to do is to make what is a difficult judgement about the right course of action for the economy as a whole. I think all groups in society are suffering from the consequences of the financial crisis. Our judgement has to be - what is the right course of action eventually to steer the economy back to low inflation close to the target and steady growth.Following on from Linda's question, are you confident - there was a lot of debate probably at the last time of the Inflation Report, about the need to get credit to small business, other parts of the economy, and the Bank had made clear that they felt that was a job for the government, and the Chancellor has laid out various plans for credit easing - most of which have not moved very far since November.Are you confident that enough is being done to kind of buttress the effect of quantitative easing? And related to that, do you accept that at this kind of level of asset purchases, that you might be encountering diminishing returns, that this last dose, if you like - do you believe actually that it's somewhat less effective than the first dose?
Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012Let me take that second one first, and then link it to the question of the sort of action that might be taken for small businesses.I don't think we believe that, as a matter of principle, asset purchases exhibit diminishing returns. I don't think that as a matter of principle. But of course any monetary policy easing - not just asset purchases, but even reductions in interest rates - can exhibit a limit to how far it can go, where there needs to be a significant change in the real equilibrium of the economy. And what we're doing at present by easing monetary policy is to try to persuade people to bring forward spending from the future to the present, from next year to this year.Once you get to next year of course, you've taken spending out of next year to the previous year, you've got to do it again, and maybe even more so to have a similar effect. There is a limit I think to how much you can really expect spending to be brought forward from the future to the present, and the more you try to do it, the more you will find that difficult.But I think that's a problem for policy as a whole, not just asset purchases and not even just monetary policy. So I think there are, you know, in that sense, limits to what monetary policy can achieve.You look puzzled ...What you describe doesn't sound like going in the right direction. If you think we should be actually saving more - you said that at the end of your statement, because other speeches have suggested you actually thought we were going in the wrong direction ...
Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012No, I think this is what I call the paradox of policy - that there is an extraordinarily difficult adjustment. Monetary policy must not impede the adjustment to the new equilibrium; it can try to smooth it. But there is a limit to what monetary policy can achieve, clearly, if you have to make that adjustment to a new position.And I think that, you know, very significant amounts of deleveraging by, not just households, but particularly by the financial sector, which is affecting their willingness to lend, then there is a limit to how far you can expect to make that kind of adjustment while going along steadily and serenely at the long run average rate of growth. It is bound to be a bumpy ride as you adjust, and it's very important we don't impede that adjustment.The big message I'd want to give from this is, I think, more than any other advanced economy, we are in the position where we've put in place the conditions that are needed to make that big adjustment. There is a credible medium term fiscal plan to put our deficit in shape and to get back to a point where the ratio of national debt to GDP can begin to fall back. And we have been able successfully to absorb a 25% fall in the exchange rate without any rise in wage inflation. In fact wage inflation has fallen. That is something that many people thought was impossible.But we've managed to do that, and those two things together, it seems to me, should give us confidence that we are going in the right direction. But it is a difficult journey. And it's impossible to predict the path with any degree of certainty.But what is most important is to get those conditions in place, and many of my colleagues and peers abroad would very much like to be in a position where they had put those two conditions in place. We have, and that's why I concluded by saying I think we are moving in the right direction.
Richard Edgar, ITV News:Mervyn King:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012You mentioned unemployment in your introduction, and I'm wondering if you can give your reaction to today's unemployment figures, and how they fit into the uncertain path to recovery that you mentioned?I don't think I've any particular reaction. They've changed very little on the previous month. They're absolutely consistent with what we see happening in the economy, so I don't think there's any particular news in these figures. But obviously the height of unemployment is a concern for everyone, particularly for youth unemployment; these are not figures that anyone would choose to have.But as I said, we have a very difficult adjustment to make in our economy, and there's no point in pretending otherwise. And this is the consequence of it.You just explained how we are making the right adjustments for long term stability, but in the shorter term the issue is of growth, and I'm just wondering if there is anything we can do in the more immediate term to stimulate growth, or are we entirely in the hands of the macro environment and the developments in the eurozone, for example.Well, we are doing a great deal - in two ways. First of all on monetary policy we have an extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy with a high degree of asset purchases which is unprecedented in our monetary history. So we are certainly doing a great deal on the monetary front.And even on the fiscal front, I don't think you should underestimate the impact of the automatic stabilisers. In this country the automatic stabilisers are pretty potent. They're large
Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012relative to discretionary changes in fiscal policy. And they are an important part of a framework for fiscal policy that says - yes, there is a clear medium term plan, but the quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year movements in the economy will clearly have an impact on the paths of the deficit as the automatic stabilisers kick in.So there's a great deal that is being done. I think that - I know that, employed by the 24-hour media, your focus is often very short term; we're going through an adjustment that will take a long time, in which - you know, I've just said I think even a quarter is a drop in the ocean in the time that's required, and we shouldn't get too excited about one number every three months, let alone one a day.So I think patience is a quality I would urge on all of us, because if we can't expect to get through this quickly, what matters is that we're going in the right direction and we have a path which we intend to follow.If you're looking for other measures, then - as I said in the speech I made in Brighton in January - there is always - it is always sensible to introduce supply side reforms that raise productivity - that goes without saying. But it's particularly valuable to make supply side reforms in present circumstances; first because higher than expected future incomes may encourage more spending today, and secondly because higher than expected future incomes may validate some of the debt that was taken out before the crisis hit and which now looks excessive relative to current incomes.So that may have an impact on the speed of deleveraging. So this is a very good time to consider a range of supply side reforms.
Tetsufumi Arita, Asahi Shimbun:Mervyn King:Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012But I will put it no more specifically than that, because it's not for me to say what supply side reform should be examined.The Bank of Japan decided to introduce some kind of inflation target yesterday. So generally speaking, do you think the inflation target is very useful when we are fighting against inflation and also fighting against deflation?Well, my good friend, Governor Shirakawa, has always been very polite in not commenting on what British monetary policy should be or has been, and I'm not going to comment on what the Bank of Japan should do.From our point of view, inflation targeting I think has proved a very helpful framework in which to set monetary policy. But I do think that the experience of the last four to five years has raised some question marks about what inflation targeting can hope to achieve and whether it's sufficient. I think our feeling now is that it - on its own it's not sufficient; it did not prevent the build-up of a large degree of financial instability.And there is, I think, a debate to be had about whether other instruments are the right way to deal with that, through our Financial Policy Committee, or whether monetary policy should take other considerations into account.Governor Shirakawa has written extensively on this and most illuminatingly on it too. So I think we all have a great deal to reflect on. And once the crisis is a little bit further down the road, I hope we'll have more time to sit back and reflect on the lessons of the past. We're still going through it and it's a bit premature to draw strong conclusions at this stage.
Tim Wallace, City AM:Mervyn King:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012There's been several economists recently suggested banks are still impaired by the bad loans they gave out before the crisis, and in that kind of circumstance QE can't really help until those banks have sorted out their positions. Is that a valid argument, do you think? And what would you suggest as a way of getting past that kind of problem?Well, there's certainly a lot of truth in the proposition that, since monetary policy does tend to work through the banking system, that an impaired banking system is one that will diminish the effectiveness of monetary policy, and we've been very conscious of that ever since 2008. So the right thing to do is to move as quickly as possible to put the banking system back on a healthier footing, to write off losses, recapitalise the banking system and move forward.	That was the argument that the Bank of England started to make as early as December 2007, and we pushed it very strongly in 2008, and the United Kingdom, I think, led the way in making clear this was the right policy. And I think that, relative to many Continental banks, we have moved a long way in the process of putting our banking system back into a healthier position, in terms of the amount of capital and in terms therefore of the ability of our banks to raise funding from the markets.Now I think therefore the UK is a long way through this. There is a difficulty in that many large UK banks are exposed, not to sovereign debt primarily of periphery countries in the euro area, but to the real economy of some those countries. And if those countries suffer greatly, then our banks, through subsidiaries and direct lending from here, will indeed perhaps suffer further losses - some of which they've made provisions for, some of which they probably haven't.And that's one reason I think why markets are still pretty nervous about banks everywhere, because banks having such extensive
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mervyn King: Charlie Bean:Ainsley Thomson, Dow Jones:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012international interconnectedness are exposed to problems in any major part of the world economy. So that's a problem we have to work our way through, but I think the UK banks have made much more progress than many others.I just want to tease out the MPC's thinking a little more on the inflation outlook. Given that the Bank clearly believes that asset purchases do have an impact on the price level, and given that the Fan Chart shoes that the likelihood is more than not that the inflation will undershoot the 2% target, what level of asset purchases would be required to bring that thick red line up to the target?I'm going to ask Charlie to take that one.I think the easiest way to answer that is simply to recall something the Governor said in his opening statement and is in the Report, which is - by the end of the forecast period, the risks of being above or below the target are roughly 50-50. So in terms of - is the thick red line at the target in the medium term? - the answer is yes. It is true that earlier in the forecast period there's a slightly greater probability of inflation being below rather than above the target, but in terms of the monetary policy decision, we don't try and control the target inflation rate at a particular horizon; it's the general picture. And we obviously need to take account of what risks might be out there, not only to inflation but also to activity. So there's a number of things that feed in to the decision, but the key point is that the risks around the target are equally balanced at the forecast horizon.Wasn't the decision to change the maturity brands and the Bank's asset purchases deliberately aimed at relieving some of the pressure on pension funds by pushing up longer term bond yields?
Mervyn King:Paul Fisher:Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012No, it wasn't designed to attack any particular problem. We needed to decide where our structure of purchases would be, and we felt it sensible to align ourselves with the DMO in terms of the definitions of the baskets. But let me ask Paul Fisher to comment on that.This was a purely operational decision, although made in consultation with the MPC, designed to make sure that we can deliver on the MPC's objective, which was, stated back in October, of buying along the curve. We are still buying all the way along the curve and in quite large size. We don't target any particular maturity, but the average maturity we would expect over the next three months is broadly in line with the average maturity of gilts in issue, if anything slightly higher.Governor, you said before that you believe that bankers' incentives should be aligned to their - well, their salaries should be aligned to their performance, and so there shouldn't be any rewards for failure.I'd like to suggest to you that there's a group of bankers here in London who have repeatedly missed their target, and yet haven't been punished as a result from their remuneration. And that group is the Monetary Policy Committee who have repeatedly missed the target. I'm just wondering whether there ought to be any wisdom in considering a remuneration system for the MPC that took account of their performance, or is the MPC simply above that?No, it's entirely up to you and parliament to decide what the scheme should be. I think that the idea that in policy you should be paying yourself - we would have paid ourselves bonuses in the past, presumably quite a large amount under your scheme. I
Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012think that's a rather foolish way of doing it, to be honest. I think we're here for public service and we gain or lose in terms of reputation by either hitting or missing the target.What we've done, in the last three or four years, is try to explain why the target was missed and why it would not have been sensible to have kept interest rates at a very high level in order simply to meet the target year by year, because we would then find ourselves in a position today where we would almost certainly be facing a significant undershoot of the target, because we would have generated a deep recession.And our remit makes it very clear that we are not supposed to bring inflation back to the target immediately if to do so would create undesirable volatility of output. And I think that a deeper recession than the 1930s would in my view meet the definition of undesirable volatility of output.So I think that what we did was to meet our remit. But I think rather than mess around with arbitrary financial rewards which will always be pointless in my view, and controversial - certainly will have no effect on the effort that we put into our jobs - we need a proper debate. And I think you and others are perfectly entitled to criticise us and say - no, the wrong policy was followed - or occasionally to say the right policy was followed. That's what improves policy; it's having a good public debate where people, in a constructive way, I hope, will say - well, actually maybe this was or was not the right decision. Would it not have been better to do something else? In that way we can benefit from it and we would hope therefore to make better policy in the future.But I think having an open, public, transparent debate is a much more effective way of trying to ensure that we face the right incentives than anything else. And after all, each member of the
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Harold Evans, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012MPC has to vote individually, so we can't hide behind the consensus of the Committee. Each of us has an individual voting record which we can defend, and we have to defend when we go to the Treasury Committee, for example.Would you say that public servants shouldn't receive bonuses even if they're working in a bank?I'm not talking about anyone else. I'm talking about the Bank of England.At the bottom of page 6 you say that a failure to implement a credible and effective set of measures to sort out the eurozone crisis could have severe implications for the UK. What would those severe implications be, and what if anything can we do to guard against them?Well, I think it would take the form of a substantial fall in spending demand and hence our exports to the euro area, which would clearly challenge our strategy of rebalancing. I don't think there's very much we can do about it until it happens. We can prepare contingencies, as I said before, for specific events, but in terms of macroeconomic policy, when the Chancellor and I go to international meetings, we point out the underlying challenges, the need to use the time that has been purchased by the ECB to put in place a more fundamental solution. We try and do it diplomatically, but only other people can take these decisions. We're observers primarily, but we've done our best to try to ensure that other people are aware of our view that there are difficulties here in terms of competitiveness and the need to find ways - not just for a few months, but permanently - to deal with the need to finance the external deficits of many of the countries in the euro area.
Svenya O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Mervyn King:Hugo Duncan, The Daily Mail:Mervyn King:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012Those are big challenges, and we are affected by them, as many other countries around the world are too. And that's why I'm sure at the G20 meeting in Mexico City in 10 days' time, this will be near the top item on the agenda.Governor, how much do you think consumers can benefit from the drop in inflation, given that wages are stagnant and unemployment is rising?Well, I think it's what lies behind the fall in inflation. The fact that VAT didn't go up this year, the fact that there'll be some cuts in gas and electricity prices this month and next, the fact that we're not seeing the significant rise in oil and energy prices and food prices that we saw last year - it's those things that will have a direct benefit I think on the real value of take home pay. And that I think will be quite significant.The report says that there appears to have been little improvement in credit conditions for small businesses since the end of the recession. How concerned are you, given what's going on in the eurozone and elsewhere, that things are actually going to get worse this year for small businesses rather than improve?Well, I hope that with some signs - certainly in the second half of the year, of a gradual recovery - that then things should start to improve. But we are very conscious that credit conditions if anything are still tightening for small businesses, and that goes back to the question I know several of you have tried to ask - so let me try to answer it now - about the credit conditions facing small businesses.It's pretty obvious that net lending by banks to businesses as a whole has fallen quarter by quarter through 2011. Now we don't think this is a major issue for large businesses, and therefore
Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012really for the level of investment in the UK, which is dominated by big businesses. Big businesses can borrow money more cheaply than our biggest banks now, so they can go round the banking system and issue corporate bond equity to finance themselves.The real challenge are for those firms that inevitably have to depend on the banking system - small businesses. So the question is - what is to be done about it? Now this is something I've spoken about now for three or four years. For a long period I pointed out that, you know, the government owned two of the biggest four lenders; and if they owned them, they could do something about it directly.I suspect we've moved beyond that now, and the question is - what can we do about it? The first principle, I think, is that you need to use the banking system. The difficulty with helping small businesses is that some small businesses have good ideas, others less good ideas, and some positively very risky ideas. It doesn't make sense, as a country, for us to finance all small businesses or people with ideas for projects they'd like to implement. You need somebody to assess the merits of these proposals and decide which are worth sponsoring and which are not.That requires an infrastructure which only our banking system can provide. So one way or another, to help small businesses, it has to be done through the infrastructure in our existing banking system.The second is that we need to recognise that our banks are deleveraging, and they are still moving to a position where they are trying to strengthen their capital position in order that they will then be in a stronger position to borrow more cheaply from the market, so that they can then lend the funds on. So in the long
Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012run the deleveraging of our banking system is very much in the interests of small businesses, but of course it creates a challenge for the interim period.That's why the kind of schemes that we've suggested to government take the form of government sharing with the banking system the funding requirement, and this is the idea that really lies behind the National Loan Guarantee Scheme. Now as Stephanie pointed out, that hasn't started yet, but I know the Chancellor is very keen that it will start soon. And you have to get the practical details of the scheme right first, but I know the intention is to get it working.There will, however, I think continue to be a problem for small businesses until the banking system is really back in a healthy condition. That's something which the banks are working very hard to do. They have I think made, as I said before, big progress in being able to raise funds from the market, albeit at higher cost than in the past, relative to Bank Rate; but nevertheless they can raise funds in the market. And this is absolutely fundamental to their being able to do this on a sustainable basis.One thing we've managed to achieve, I think, in the past three years is to support the banking system in the moment of crisis, but then to move it on so that now UK banks can fund themselves without being dependent on the government or the central bank. And that's very important, and our banks are benefiting from that in terms of their ability to raise funds in the market.There is still more time to elapse before the banks will be back in a healthier position, and there are still risks, primarily from the euro area. But we are, again, moving in that direction.
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012If the government feels there is a particular problem with small businesses, and the amount of money involved is not enormous, then the answer is to have a special scheme for small businesses. But I think the principles need to be based on both the fact that you have to use the infrastructure and the banking system; you need to share the risk between the banks and elsewhere on a pari passu basis, so the banks don't try and dump the worst loans on the public sector; and you need to ensure that any scheme reduces the funding requirement of banks, which will ease their leveraging problems when thinking of increasing the lending it might make to the small business sector.But there is a problem still, and it can be seen very simply in the fact that net lending to business fell every quarter last year.Back to the eurozone, the Report says that implementation of a credible and effective set of policies there, i.e. the eurozone, would support UK activity by easing strains within financial markets. This of course begs the question of whether credible policy is any longer possible in the eurozone. So what are these policies? What do you think needs to be done there?Well, we chose that phrase precisely because we didn't want to go into detail. It's not for me to tell countries in the euro area what policies they should pursue. What I have said, and I don't want to go into this in any more detail, is that the underlying problems are those of competitiveness and the difficulty of persuading the private sector to finance the external deficits of the periphery countries.Buying time is maybe a good idea, but only if you can find a route to solve those underlying problems, and that is the route which needs to be focused on.
Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Mervyn King:Spencer Dale:Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012Governor, on page 26 you highlight what is potentially a big structural change in the labour market. You say self-employment has accounted for about a quarter of private sector payroll growth since 2010, and self-employment you say has risen markedly in Q3. Now you sort of leave it hanging there, but as this is an Inflation Report can we take it that the thinking is that the more self-employed people there are, the less wage inflation pressure there is likely to be? And supplementary to that, is there any downside to the growth in self-employment in terms of lower productivity growth which I know you're worried about elsewhere in the Report?Well I'm going to ask Spencer to come in and comment on this. I mean, my feeling is it's too soon to tell; we need to see a lot more about what happens in the labour market. Clearly when we've had downturns in the past, we have seen people move from employment to self-employment, so this is part of a pattern. What it means I think moving ahead is, I think, difficult to judge. But let me ask Spencer to talk about this.I think I'll just make one further point which is, if I can draw your attention to Chart 3.5 on page 25, and that just shows the trend of self-employment as a share of total employment. And so you can see the tick up in the most recent data, but this chart puts that tick up in sort of a broader context and shows that the pattern we've seen is pretty much a continuation of a pattern we've seen over the last six or seven years. So I think it's - as the Governor said, I think it's important that we don't get too carried away with one quarter's data, if you see it in this context of this broader increase we've seen in self-employment over the last six or seven years.Governor, there's an important debate going on in Scotland based around the Bank of England, I just wanted to know if the Bank had made any contingencies, or done any reports into what
Mervyn King:Linda Yueh, Bloomberg TV:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012would happen if Scotland went for independence, indeed whether the Bank of England would act as lender of last resort for Scottish financial institutions in the event of independence?I'm in no doubt that the debate about the possibility of Scottish independence is one that will feature significantly - the economic aspect, and in particular the currency aspect, lender of last resort and so on. Obviously that's got not a lot to do with the February Inflation Report. It's a very important question and I hope those issues will feature prominently in the debate, but I don't want to say anything about it today. Those are things we can return to in the future.Governor, why can't the Bank of England buy assets other than gilts? And the reason is lots of the facts that you've mentioned - net lending falling every single quarter of last year - and you've also mentioned deleveraging several times. And one of the lessons from Japan is that there's a difference between a so-called balance sheet recession where you have a great deal of deleveraging versus say a credit crunch which is a consequence of having a financial crisis and therefore having banks which aren't willing to lend.So therefore, if you have a balance sheet recession where deleveraging is happening across the economy, including households, and in terms of corporates and banks even, why not get more creative? Why not, for instance, buy securitised loans? Why not inject more capital into perhaps even an SME bank, something which one of your colleagues Adam Posen has suggested? You know, why not try and address that aspect of lending more directly, rather than do quantitative easing through gilt purchases, which doesn't seem to have really moved up credit by very much in the economy in the last few years?
Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012Well I think the simple reason is that that would be asking us to buy something that no one else in the economy wanted to buy, and that's the definition of a subsidy essentially. So when we put money into the economy through our Asset Purchase Programme which we've now done - almost getting on for £300bn - there are people out there in the private sector who have £300bn worth of money which they then spend on other assets. There's nothing to stop them buying - whether it's securitised loans issued by SMEs or anyone else, or paper issued by companies, or equities, and indeed they do.The question is why would we want to decide which assets should be purchased rather than the market itself? Now if you can detect an example - which we did with small and medium sized enterprises - where they are being particularly harshly treated, where there is particular market failure, then there is an argument for intervention. But that's an argument for giving a subsidy to that sector relative to the rest of the economy.That is something which the government should decide, not us. And we're very often accused all the time of being - you know overly powerful, making decisions which only the government should make for the use of public funds, and here you are suggesting that we should use public funds to decide who gets subsidised. That's not the role of a central bank. It is the role of the government to make a decision about a scheme that discriminates among different parts of the economy. We can act as the agent of the government, of course, but the decision on it and the terms on it have to be decided by government.Now as I've said, the reason why SMEs have come up is because they are suffering. But as I argued before SMEs are in no position to issue securitised paper and, frankly, if banks issued securitised paper you'd want to know an awful lot about what was in that
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King: Paul Fisher:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012before you decided to buy any of it, because the stuff that might have been securitised may well have been the least attractive assets. We've seen examples of that in the mortgage market before.So there is a great difficulty, and that's why we have a banking system in order that banks can themselves make judgements about which are the credit risks worth taking, and they themselves suffer the gains or losses from making good or bad credit decisions. And I think that's what we have to do, to find a way to ensure the banking system can start to carry out its normal job once again. That's going to be the essence of SME lending.But the idea that somehow there are all kinds of other assets that are not being purchased today, which we should purchase, is a fallacy, because the money that we've put into the economy, this £300bn, is spent on buying other assets by the people who sold the gilts to us, and they decide which assets they want to buy. And it's not for us to tell them what to buy, they make their own decisions. That's how the money moves from one bank account to another, that's what our Asset Purchase Scheme achieves.A couple of months ago you unveiled the Extended Collateral Term Repo facility. Can you explain a bit more about precisely what that is? Is that analogous to the ECB's LTRO at all, and under what circumstances would you set it into action?Let me ask Paul to take that.No the ECTR is a contingent facility. We already had in place a discount window facility where an individual bank would come to us at any time and give us illiquid collateral in return for a temporary loan. But we could see the occasion when more than one bank might want to do this simultaneously, and it might be
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012advantageous for us to push it to the market, rather than wait for the banks to come on to us effectively. So it was another avenue for delivering that short term liquidity support. But it's only intended to be short term liquidity support, not funding support. When you're doing a three year long-term repo like the ECB that's essentially moving into providing funding for the banks, and that's not where we've been going.One other thing that's happened since the last Report is obviously the Autumn Statement. Now one of the economically crucial things that happened in that statement was that the Office for Budget Responsibility changed quite substantially its estimate of our potential output growth, in the last few years, but also the next few years.That had implications for the government's budget policy, but I just wondered what the Bank of England's own assessment had been of what was going on with potential output and the potential growth rate of the economy, which obviously has to be built into your models? And whether you had also come to similarly kind of gloomy conclusions over the last six months or so? For example, do you agree with them that our potential output basically didn't change at all from the end of 2010 to the beginning of 2012, even though we had such slow growth?I'll ask Charlie to comment on this in a minute. Let me make a couple of general points. We certainly did not change our assessment in that six month period. I mean, I think the OBR basically said - hmm. They thought again and decided that the judgement they made in the spring was the wrong one, and they changed it in the autumn. I think they are now more pessimistic then we are on that, but the fact is nobody really knows. I mean this is almost impossible to judge - about the amount of potential output in the economy. And we should be honest about that.
Charlie Bean:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012But I don't think there was any real news in the six months between the spring and the autumn to justify anything that would - I mean, it may be that they corrected a position which they regret that they took in the spring, but I don't think there was any news that would justify that real change. And certainly nothing that would justify a significant change of policy.As for what the true position in terms of the underlying potential output is, as I say, it's very, very hard to judge. Overall, we don't think there is any reason to believe that the long run growth rate of the economy will be lower than it was before the crisis hit. But what the impact of the crisis is on potential output and productivity growth in say the five years immediately after the crisis hitting, is a much harder question, and I we do think that it had some impact on productivity growth in that period. But perhaps Charlie can tell us how much?I wish I could. In my view, if I can just refer you to pages 28 and 29 of the Report, because this helpfully exposes the puzzle that we and the OBR and other forecasters are grappling with, in that since the crisis and the recession output and productivity have been well below a continuation of their pre-crisis trends. And that's illustrated in Chart A on page 28 quite clearly. The blue line is for manufacturing, the yellow line for services, and you can see there is a substantial gap relative to the dotted lines which are a continuation of the pre-crisis trends.On the face of it, that might suggest a lot of spare capacity in the economy. On the other hand when we look at other indicators of slack - direct indicators of slack such as measures of capacity utilisation from businesses, so Chart 3.10 on the facing page, for instance, that suggests the current margin of slack is quite modest - an implication that there's been significant, either supply
Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012destruction - potential output destruction - or that during the three or four years since the recession that underlying productivity growth has been extremely low.Now we're trying to get to the bottom of what's going on here. One of the things we've been looking at recently is trying to dig down more into divergences across sectors, and that's what the box on page 28 is trying to do. And interestingly, there are some quite significant differences in the behaviour of productivity across sectors, and in particular those service sectors that grew relatively rapidly in the years leading up to the crisis those are also ones which have grown very slowly, or in some cases productivity has actually substantially fallen, since the crisis.So a classic example here is finance and insurance, also transport and storage, which is on the right hand side of chart B on page 28. The pre-crisis average growth rates are given by the purple bars in that chart.So there are some interesting developments going on beneath the surface here. Now we're still digging into this, but we thought the results were sufficiently interesting to want to include them in the Report.As far as the rate of productivity growth further ahead goes, we don't see a compelling reason to believe the underlying growth rate of productivity for the UK should be markedly different in the future from what it has been in the past. So we see the impact of the crisis as being one that is temporary on the rate of growth of productivity, we don't anticipate a permanently lower rate of productivity growth as a result of what's happened in the last few years.
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mervyn King:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012Governor this week the credit rating agency Moody's has said that Britain's AAA status is at risk. But given the mess that these agencies made of valuing mortgage backed securities during the boom, shouldn’t the response of policymakers, the media, the markets, the press, be to simply ignore what these discredited agencies say?Well I don't see any reason either to ignore or get overly concerned about it just because it's a rating agency. I think it's a reminder that we are facing a very challenging path to reduce the scale of our deficit so that at some point the ratio of national debt to GDP can start to fall back again, which has to be the objective. And it's an objective which for example Ben Bernanke and the Federal Reserve have stressed as crucial for the United States. They don't have a long term plan to achieve that and he's been urging that on Congress for quite a long time. We do, and I think it's very important that we keep to that, we have that plan.More generally, what we've been saying is that everyone involved in financial markets, to try to rely less mechanically on what rating agencies say. That's what we do in the Bank of England and we would like others to do as well. But I don't see any reason to dismiss this just because in the past rating agencies got things wrong. I think we should look at this and say - yeah, this is a reminder that we are facing a very challenging task and the important thing is to confront it and deal with it.I just wondered if you can go into a bit more detail on households. Obviously the indication is that households in the second half of the year will benefit from falling inflation, so the squeeze will ease a little. But you do raise some concerns about credit conditions for households; the cost of credit is rising for them; you talk about the need to deleverage in households; and also we've seen a rise in savings rates. So although maybe inflation will make life easier
Mervyn King:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012- is it not the case that actually there are other pressures which are coming through which will make life more difficult for households, and so the pain isn't going to be going. I just wondered if you could expand on that?Let me make one general comment and then ask Spencer to come in on this. I think that, insofar as the pressures squeezed real incomes in the last couple of years or three years are concerned, those have already come to an end by and large, and that households are already beginning to see some benefit.The headline inflation rate is the increase in prices over the previous 12 months. But obviously a large chunk of that increase in prices which contributes to the inflation rate of 3.6% took place last year, and we're seeing now a much lower rate of price increases. So I think the ease on real incomes is already being seen. But clearly the squeeze on real incomes is not being unwound; it's merely that there isn't a further squeeze. But that in itself should help to give some upward pressure to consumer spending.In terms of credit conditions, what we saw in the second half of last year was a deterioration in the funding costs for banks really around the world, but particularly in Europe. And so that did increase the funding cost to our banks, and you can see some of that's already been passed through. So the example we give in the Report is that the cost of a standard tracker mortgage - 75% loan to value ratio - has gone up by half a percentage point.But since the turn of the year, we've seen the funding cost of banks go down again and things have improved quite a bit. Now whether that will continue remains to be seen, but if it does, then I would expect that we would not see any further deterioration in credit conditions or the price of credit. And so that should not be
Spencer Dale:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012adding to the difficulties facing consumers. But Spencer can tell me whether that's right or not.I'm sure it's right. When thinking about the prospects for consumption, I think one way of thinking about it is there's sort of two key determinants. One is what do you think is going to happen to household's real incomes? And secondly what do you think - what proportion of those real incomes, that growth in real incomes, will be spent, and how much of it will be saved? So as the Governor said, in terms of that first determinant we think household's real income should gradually recover over the next few years as this dampening pressure from high inflation gradually eases. So we do expect to see some pick up in real incomes.The second question is how much of that will the consumer spend and how much will they save? And if you look at Chart 2.4 on page 19 as the Governor said earlier this morning we have seen an increase in household's savings rate, relative to prior to the recession. So households are saving a great proportion of their incomes.Now one factor which could account for that is tighter credit conditions, as the Governor was just talking about. Another one could be that households, in response to the greater uncertainty in terms of the economic outlook, wish to increase their levels of savings to provide a greater buffer and precautionary balances against future shocks into the future.So a key judgement is - what is likely to happen to this savings ratio going forward? Could it fall back down as people think they've got to the right level of precautionary balances and so therefore need to save a smaller proportion of their income? Or
Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Mervyn King:Facilitator:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Page 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012may we see it continue to stay high and perhaps rise a bit more if people have a bit more further savings to go?The central judgement of the Committee, we may see some small further rise in the savings ratio in the near term, but further out we would expect consumption to be broadly following the pattern of households' incomes.Governor, another question on asset purchases. Considering the Bank of England is on track to hold almost a third of the gilt market, and you are not considering buying other assets, does this mean that we're reaching the limit of what monetary policy can do?No, if we wanted to do more we certainly could do it. Clearly a third is a high number, but it's only a third, and the amount of gilts which is out there is increasing all the time as the deficit remains very large. So, you know, we're hardly managing to keep up with the stuff that's being issued. But I don't think that's a practical limit at all, no. Whether we choose to do any more is a different question, but that's something we'll have to reflect on each month as we confront it.I think we've got time for just two more, first of all Larry and then Jeremy.On page 7 you say that it will take until mid-way through the forecasting horizon to get output back to where it was at its peak; roughly that's sort of a six year period to get back to where we were before the crisis. That's a longer period of time than it took to recover in the 1930s. If you take a sort of rough estimate of trend GDP, that's probably something like £200bn worth of output. I just wonder, a) how much of that, if any, do you think the economy will ever get back or is that lost forever? And b) how
Mervyn King:Page 30 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012much of that long adjustment period is due to factors beyond the control of policymakers, and how much is it due to errors of policy that were made either before, during, or after the crisis of 2007/08?I think it would have been difficult to have prevented that lost output through different policies after the crisis had been hit. I think we saw around the world, but certainly in this country, pretty rapid and strong policy moves to both recapitalise the banking system and to give it support and to provide stimulatory monetary and fiscal policy, and then to put in place a plan to make this something that's sustainable in the long run.So I find it quite difficult to - clearly you can argue about somewhat different policies, everyone is entitled to do it. But I find it very difficult to think of a major change in policy that would have prevented this loss in output. And most countries that had very large banking systems relative to GDP experienced this kind of pattern. And remember that the size of our banking system relative to GDP was only after Iceland, Ireland, Switzerland, then the UK, and we had a five times larger banking system relative to GDP than the United States. So we were very much an outlier.So if you were to go back and say, you know, should policy have been different beforehand, well I mean you can certainly ask questions about what kind of policy should have been different. To my mind I think the two big challenges facing policy that we didn't satisfactorily answer were one allowing the leverage of our banking system to get to such extraordinarily high levels, which meant that the size of the balance sheets of our banks was five times GDP rather than one or two times GDP.And secondly the fact that the international imbalances went on and on and on, and everyone said this can't go on forever and it
Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Page 31 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012didn't. We haven't really solved the problem yet, but it led to a collapse of confidence in the balance sheet positions, which were the inevitable consequence of these imbalances. And that was a failure of the international financial system. I don't think you can pin that on any one country, but we failed collectively to deal with that problem, and I think many of the other problems stem from it.Now whether monetary policy should have been different beforehand that's something we can talk about perhaps on a different occasion. But all I would say is that the number of people arguing from 1997 to 2007 that our interest rates were not high enough - you know there were a few people on the MPC voting for higher interest rates, but most people in this room and most people outside were arguing that, if anything, we should have lower interest rates and not higher ones.So I don't want to deny that there were serious problems, and I'm sure errors of economic and financial policy that led to the crisis. But I think - this requires a much more sophisticated answer than there is time to give it now. I'll try and do that later this year. But after the crisis I think it's quite hard to see what else could have been done that would have prevented the lost output. But it's a measure of how serious this crisis has been and how damaging it's been, to allow ourselves to get into the position that we were when the crisis hit.One of the risks - as I read it anyway - that Moody's identified to the AAA was that of a sudden loss of market confidence, collapse in sterling forcing an increase in interest rates. All this money printing by the Central Bank - how risky is that? What are the - how likely is it that that might at some stage cause a sudden loss of market confidence?
Mervyn King:Page 32 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012I mean, another way of asking the same question is that - does the ever increasing size of the Bank of England's balance sheet keep you awake at night?Well it's certainly something that I consider very carefully - how to handle this crisis four and a half years into it I've given up not sleeping at night and decided to sleep instead. If we were to go on expanding the size of the balance sheet in circumstances where most people thought that inflation in the medium term was going to pick up, then that would risk credibility and you'd see that because long term interest rates would move up, despite our attempts to buy gilts. That hasn't happened.And I think that, you know, we've been through a testing time, we said that inflation would come down; it is coming down. And I think, to my mind, the single statistic I find most compelling here is that we have been able to absorb a 25% depreciation in the exchange rate - which is a very large figure - without a pick-up in wage inflation. And that is what means - I think we can believe that this is a persistent fall in the real exchange rate which is part of the rebalancing that's required.Now if markets were to lose confidence in our ability to retain that, then we would have to take action and we will be facing a more difficult situation. But so far we haven't, and I think the actions that we've taken, although unusual and unprecedented have been consistent with our view that inflation would come down and it is coming down. And I think it is now possible to move to a period ahead when inflation will be much closer to the target - very hard to know precisely what will happen because all kinds of unexpected events can occur - and we'll see a gradual recovery.And that is one that should not lead us to be worried about the size of the balance sheet and I have absolutely no doubt that
Facilitator:ENDPage 33 Quarterly Inflation Report - 15th February 2012when the time comes for us to reduce the size of the balance sheet that we'll find that a whole lot easier than we did when expanding it.Indeed if we felt there was a threat to the inflation target then we could both raise Bank Rate and we could sell £325bn worth of gilts over whatever period we chose. And if we chose to do it over a short period I'm absolutely confident that would raise both short term and long term interest rates and that would put a dampening effect on the economy and bring the inflation outlook back down again.So I don't think I'm worried about how we'll get out of this. And I think what we need to do is to find this tricky path, a very difficult balancing act, in which we are trying to see a big change in the equilibrium of the economy, a big rebalancing, and we're trying to smooth the adjustment to that, while not impeding the adjustment to it. That's what makes policy so difficult at present.And I'm sure looking back we will say - ah I wish we'd done something slightly differently in one month rather than another. But overall, at this stage, we feel that the broad judgement has been right, and I don't think that we are facing serious problems as a result. And certainly those people who said that asset purchases would lead us down the path of Weimar Republic and Zimbabwe I think have been proved wrong.I'm afraid that is all we have time for, so it only remains to me to thank you all very much indeed for coming this morning.