Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 14th November 2012
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012Governor, a lot of people will have looked at the inflation figures this week, they'll have looked at the average earnings figures and they'll have been worried that that squeeze that we've seen over the past few years on their disposable incomes is continuing.And you said in a previous - in one of these meetings previously - that you thought that that was starting to abate. Are you still absolutely certain that that's starting to abate, or are we in for more of a squeeze?Well, I think you see it is starting to abate because inflation is no longer running at levels of 4 or 5% a year, which it was back in the autumn of last year, and yet wage increases are still running at around 2%, if not anything slightly lower - but broadly the same.And inflation has come down. It hasn't come down as much as we might have hoped, and as I said in my introductory remarks, many of the price increases that are pushing up on the headline inflation measure are those coming from the sectors less exposed to market pressures.With the Treasury setting monetary conditions now, and the Bank executive setting credit conditions, what's the point of the MPC?Well, I don't accept the premise of your question. The Treasury doesn't set monetary conditions. There is now a clear arrangement in place under which the coupons will be transferred to the Treasury and less debt issued by the Treasury. And that is equivalent, indeed, to asset purchases of that amount. But we know what that amount is, and we can offset it in our own decision.
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012Indeed, knowing that this was going to be the case was one of the factors that fed into the Committee's decision not to extend the asset purchase programme last week.So the Committee is fully in charge of the overall effective asset purchase programme, and that was something which the Chancellor asked me to confirm, having consulted with the MPC, before he went ahead with his announcement. And the Committee did confirm that, and states it. So I'm afraid I simply don't accept the premise of the question.You spoke a little bit about why the inflation forecast just for the next few months is a bit higher than in August. Looking at the charts, the projection for GDP over the next year or so is a fair bit lower. And just looking at the projection of the level of GDP, it looks like it's put off - if the central estimate is right - it's put off the time when we get back to where we were at the end of '07 by another six months or maybe even a year.Could you just say a little bit about why that forecast has changed and, related to that, whether you have responded to any of this new research suggesting that the fiscal tightening may have had a bigger impact on the economy than previously thought, and incorporated that in your model?Yes, there are two parts to that. I'll ask Charlie to speak in a minute about fiscal multipliers, though I will just say straight away that I share the view, which I think Chris has written about, that you can explain the difference between our central projection that we believed in back in 2010 and the outturns in terms of the much greater squeeze on real incomes, and hence weaker consumer spending, and the impact of the euro area crisis on both exports, and also the effect of uncertainty on bank funding costs and hence investment.
Ben Chu, The Independent:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012So I don't think fiscal multipliers is the answer to the question of why growth has been weak.To go back to the first part of your question, there isn't actually very much change in our central view about the growth profile, looking further out. It is a bit weaker in the first year, and that's reflecting the fact that the squeeze on real take home pay is going to be a little bit bigger than we thought in August. It's not a major factor; it doesn't push it out - the date that you referred to - by very much.What we have done, and this is more significant I think, is if you look at the charts on Page 40 - the Ziggurat Charts, which show the risks - we have - after a period of a year of reflecting on all this - decided that we think the chances of a rapid recovery are a good deal less than we thought. So in our previous Fan Charts we did have some probability attached to pretty rapid recovery growth rates of 4% or more. I think we feel that the persistence of the weakness in the world environment has been such now that we attach much less weight to those very rapid growth outcomes; though we don't attach any greater weight to much weaker outturns.So we've shifted the mass of the distribution, if you like, closer to the centre and attach less weight to the very strong outturns that might have occurred. I think that's just a realistic reflection of where we think the world economy is going. I think otherwise, in the broad outlook of the projections, they're not enormous changes that we've made today.Following on from that theme about growth forecasts, the recent Stockton review noted that the Bank hasn't put in train a systematic, detailed and quantitative analysis of its forecast
Mervyn King:Linda Yueh, Bloomberg TV:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012errors. Are you able to explain to us why such an analysis wasn't enacted, and are you able to say whether we are going to see such an analysis now?We do do a great deal of analysis, and that's what the forecast round is about. The Stockton report is detailed and thoughtful, and the Monetary Policy Committee will turn now to a careful examination of - it doesn't make any recommendations, the Stockton report; what it does is to make options - it sets out a number of options for us to consider. And the MPC will now spend a considerable amount of time going through that.The last two weeks we've been obviously preoccupied with assessing the outlook for the economy, making our decision last week, and producing the Inflation report for today. But we will now turn in the rest of the year to a careful assessment of everything that the Stockton report puts forward, and I'm not going to comment on this today. This is a matter for the Monetary Policy Committee to make its judgement on. It will do that. And we said that we will report back to the Bank's Court, and we'll do that early in the New Year.Governor, there's quite a big section on Page 22 in terms of household savings and the rise in debt. Can you just explain why the pause in quantitative easing? As I understand it, part of QE is intended to help the deleveraging process, so it allows the Bank to take some gilts debt off the balance sheets of non-financial corporations. So it was serving a role which was slightly different than what the Funding for Lending programme does, which is much more about credit easing and lower funding costs.But for households, as you pointed out in the Report, which are highly indebted, the credit easing scheme may not actually be enough to address one of the fundamental causes of weak
Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012growth, which is indebted households and the deleveraging process.So please can you just kind of talk through - you said QE is not over, you still have it; but why pause now?Well I think the outlook for inflation in the Inflation Report we published this morning explains exactly why we paused. And we know that there is going to be approximately £37 billion of equivalent asset purchases implied by the transfer of coupons in the APF fund to the Treasury. That will take place over the next ten months. Given that that is going to happen, given the outlook for inflation, I think the Committee felt that no change was the right decision last week.There clearly is a difference between asset purchases and the Funding for Lending scheme. Asset purchases are about ensuring the right amount of money is created in the economy to support overall demand, and the Funding for Lending scheme is designed to deal with problems in the banking system, to provide strong financial incentives to allow banks to expand lending to the UK economy.And we very carefully calibrated the Funding for Lending scheme to ensure that those banks that might have been willing to expand lending have a big incentive to expand by more than they would otherwise have done, and that a small number of big banks that would have contracted lending in the absence of the scheme have a strong incentive to contract it by less.And the scheme I think does have that effect. I think we're optimistic that it will have an impact. But of course, it certainly isn't the solution or a magic ingredient to how to ensure the economy grows faster. As I said at the beginning, the world
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012economy is growing slowly. We face a difficult challenge in our biggest export market - the euro area plus the countries around it account for one half of our trade. The prospects there look pretty bleak. This is a very difficult environment in which the UK economy is trying to rebalance.And rebalance we have to, because that's the new equilibrium to which at some point we have to get. This is the challenge facing the world economy as a whole. It's not just a UK challenge; it's a global challenge.Just to follow up Chris's question, Governor. Who decided to repatriate these QE funds? Was it the Treasury and that was a decision that you acquiesced in? And are you worried presentationally how this might look if it makes a difference between the Chancellor meeting his debt target and not?No, I mean, I - to be honest, I think it's a lot of fuss about nothing with this scheme. I don't think it affects anything very much. I mean, the Treasury are the beneficial owners of all the monies in the asset purchase facility. They're taking some cash out now; it's perfectly reasonable to do that, rather than to issue gilts to allow the cash to stay in the APF. It's exactly what happens in Japan, in the United States. We know what the effect of this transfer will be. We will offset that in our own asset purchases. We remain firmly in control of monetary conditions. It doesn't affect the public finances to any significant extent; it's just a question of the timing of the cash flows - the more cash that comes out of the APF now, the more that will have to go back in or the less we'll have to transfer to the Treasury later on.That's clearly part of a binding agreement. I don't think we're terribly - this is not the major issue that the UK is facing.
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012Governor, on Page 40, at the bottom of it, you say that they UK economy may be in a period of persistently low growth. I think that’s the first time the Bank's actually used that phrase. On previous occasions you've been a bit more optimistic about the long-term future of the economy.Why do you think the economy may be stuck in a persistently low growth environment? And what does that actually mean in terms of the long-term prospects for recovery?I think this goes back to what I said at the beginning, which is not just the UK, but the world economy is having to move to a new real equilibrium - to use the economists' jargon - in which those countries that were borrowing a lot from abroad have had to - will have to reduce the scale of that borrowing and reduce those deficits, and countries with large trade surpluses will have, one way or another, to adjust the balance of their economy to rely less on exports surpluses. It's proving extremely difficult to bring about that adjustment to the real equilibrium, and in that process the world economy is growing more slowly, and so any deficit country like ours, which is trying to make that adjustment, is confronted with a major difficulty in rebalancing at a time when global demand is very weak.I suspect that the only economy in the world with a deficit that is capable of ignoring these pressures in a way is the United States, and even there clearly there are concerns about the effect of debt positions. But any other economy I think has to make that adjustment in equilibrium, and we will too, and so will other economies in the world. And the question is how long will people contract the agony.I wonder though what's changed? I mean, you do seem to have become a lot gloomier in recent quarters. I mean, what's actually
Mervyn King:Richard Edgar, ITV News:Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012- on previous occasions you've said you thought the economy would eventually return to its previous growth pattern. You don't seem to be as optimistic. I just wonder what's changed in the last three to six months?I think if you take a very long term perspective, of decades, I certainly see no reason at all to suppose that the potential output of the UK will be any less than we thought it was a few years ago. The supply of ideas, innovations, investment is just as strong in the future as we thought it would be.But I think, over quite a long period now, it isn't just one economy - this is not like the Scandinavian banking crisis of the 1990s, when they had a big adjustment to make, but broadly the world economy was growing and they had a favourable world environment in which to bring about this change. The entire world is going to have to change its pattern of growth, and this is proving very difficult to bring about, particularly in a world where key countries are trying very hard to resist movements in relative prices that would facilitate those adjustments.And that is a major problem that we face. And I don't resile from that. I think we have become more concerned about this problem ever since the euro area crisis became more serious in the second half of last year. And that's why I think over the past 12 months we've become more concerned about the ability of the UK simply to ignore what is going on in the rest of the world economy. We can't; we are faced with quite serious constraints on what we can do.Governor, you've set out your forecasts which suggest more sluggish growth, of higher inflation in the near term. Do you think that means that we should be getting used to weaker jobs data as
Mervyn King:Sam Fleming, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012we've seen today? Is the puzzle of private sector employment unravelling?I think it's too soon to judge that. I think this goes to the heart of the productivity puzzle. I don't think one would say that the data released this morning were weak - some signs in the claimant count, a small increase, that maybe it's beginning to move. But there were still falls in unemployment, a rise in employment, big increase in total hours worked. This is still a pretty strong labour market, and of course it is not easy to reconcile that with a picture of underlying growth being still so weak.But I think that 2013 will be a year in which we will really, I hope, learn a lot more about how to resolve these differing patterns between what's happening in output and what's happening in the labour market.In Cardiff you put quite a lot of emphasis on the impact of unrealised loan losses and inadequate bank capital in holding back industrialised economies. I presume we're no exception to that. How important do you think that impact is in terms of what we - some people talk about zombie loans, zombie debtors - how important is that impact on the UK's slow growth trajectory at the moment?Well, it's potentially very important, and I - if you read very carefully the words that I used, I made clear that I think this is probably more true of elsewhere in Europe than it is in the United Kingdom.I think this is partly a reflection of the underlying problem, that where you have countries with large debts trying very hard to reduce the debt burden, countries with large surpluses not making an effort to reduce their surpluses - the inevitable
Spencer Dale:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012consequences of that are that some of the debts will not be repaid in full. I think we need to recognise that; that's more true elsewhere than it is in the United Kingdom.There is a small sign in the UK of some of the issues that are arising here. I think in this Report, Chart 3.9 is the one that is the most important. Let me ask Spencer to talk about Chart 3.9, and I haven't forgotten that Charlie will come back and talk about fiscal multipliers - for the first person who has the courage to ask a question about fiscal multipliers, Charlie will answer it.Okay, let me briefly talk you through Chart 3.9 on Page 31, which is - which sort of picks up some of the flavour of what Sam was talking about. So what this line shows is that the number - these data here are based on data - microdata, company accounts data lodged with Companies House. And what this shows is the number of companies that are making losses at the moment, shown in that red line, has increased quite sharply since 2007. But the number of companies that are actually going out of business remains very low.Now to some extent that's exactly what we want to happen. That's the whole point of monetary policy loosening at the moment - to keep companies who have a viable long-term future in business while demand is temporarily weak. That's the whole point of monetary policy. So I don't think we should see this as particularly alarming.However, it also does have an element that some of - the natural process by which companies which don't have such sustainable business models may be kept in business for longer. And so one could observe that you're not seeing companies going out of business at the same rate as in the past. Some of that is a good thing, but there is an element to which some of it may be more
Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Mervyn King:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012worrying for the longer term. But trying to disentangle those two effects is very difficult to do.Not a question on fiscal multipliers, I'm afraid, but on QE. Governor, some members of the MPC have voiced concerns about the effectiveness of QE, and I would like to hear from you, but also from the rest of the panel, why you think that is.And also surely, if QE is less effective, isn't that an argument for doing more of it rather than less?I don't think anyone believes that QE is in and of itself less effective in the sense that the more you do, the less effective it becomes. What everyone I think believes on the Committee is that the circumstances in which you carry out the asset purchases do make a difference to its effectiveness. So it's in that sense a function of when you do it and in what conditions.The broad point I made at the beginning was nothing to do with asset purchases as such at all, but to any monetary policy instrument - which is that, as you go through the process of adjustment to a new real equilibrium, there will be difficulties in trying to persuade people to hold off getting there. You can't postpone forever the adjustment to the new real equilibrium. And that's why, if monetary policy is trying to slow down that adjustment, it can do so for a while, it can do so up to a certain amount, but it can't do so forever. And it's in that sense that all monetary policy instruments, including asset purchases, have limits. And that's where we are now, which is we are needing to make the adjustment to rebalance the economy and there is no way that asset purchases can put that off indefinitely. And we are trying to do it at a very difficult time when the world economy is weak.
Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012Just to pick up quickly on that point. Is the suggestion that you would - if you restarted QE - you would do it differently, because obviously the environment as you say has changed? So could we have seen the end of QE in gilt purchase form?As I said very clearly in the opening remarks, we have made absolutely no decision at all not to have asset purchases as we do them now as our main instrument in future.Okay, and on the QE transfer, some people have observed that it moves you more along the spectrum towards being a fiscal agency, and I just wondered if that was the reason why when QE was set up, you designed it in a different way to the Bank of Japan and the Fed, where you did keep all of the surplus cash, so that you had the pot of money there rather than being reliant on the Treasury borrowing later to pay it off. So you were effectively more independent before. Was that the thinking behind it? So this does move you ...... No, I don't think so, no. I mean, I - to be honest, when we set this up, I don't think we gave any thought to what to do about the payments on the coupons, because at that stage I don't think people imagined that the scheme would have gone on for as long, or that the coupon payments would have built up to this size. I don't think any more thought was given to it then.I frankly am not really fussed about this one way or another. We have bought, you know £375 billion. This is £37 billion, only 10% of that figure, which will be paid over. There's a very clear binding agreement that, if it turns out to be necessary - it's not clear that it will - I mean, it depends when we sell the assets, and that is very firmly a decision of the MPC. But if there needs to be a reverse payment in order to ensure that the APF is viable, then that reverse payment will take place. And it's up to the government to
Guy Faulconbridge, Reuters:Mervyn King:Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012decide if it wants to issue fewer gilts today and have to issue more in the future. That's not matter for us to determine. I think if we had said - no, you can't do this, we would be described as a, you know, over-powerful central bank.So this is a matter for the Treasury, and from that point of view I feel quite content because they've signed a very clearly binding agreement, to which they in no sense resisted, that when the flows of cash in the form of coupons minus the financing costs of the APF are positive, those payments will go to the Treasury. And when they're negative, there'll be a reverse flow of payments. And that's very clearly in the agreement which the Chancellor and I put together last week. There's no disagreement on that at all.Given the decision last week to transfer the gilt interest to the government, what would you say to those who fear that at some point the Bank of England's gilt holdings will be monetised?Well they certainly, I mean Parliament can always decide to do what it wants, Parliament is supreme. But the Monetary Policy Committee certainly won't do that and the Chancellor reaffirmed in his letter last week that the MPC is in total control of the scale of asset purchases and asset sales. And that's all that matters to us.Governor, on Page 8, you refer to what are described as idiosyncratic factors in the inflation numbers, one of which is tuition fees, and the other of which is domestic energy. Now I think everyone would accept that at any one time most people aren't undergraduates, or parents of undergraduates and so that is a special - that is a rather specialist factor, but domestic energy bills seem rather more central. Aren't you open to the criticism that the MPC is institutionally inclined to regard anything whose price is going up as a weirdo, one off, idiosyncratic thing and that
Mervyn King:Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday: Mervyn King:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012that explains why the inflation target hasn't be met for three years?No I don't think that's true at all; there's no basis for that assertion. We've explained very clearly what the alternative was. Yes we could have raised interest rates to try and bring inflation down. What your question implies is that we didn't have a deep enough recession. Would you have liked to have had a much deeper recession?No.Thank you, well that answers the question because that's the only way we could have brought inflation back down towards the target. And I think people who - you know - blithely go on about, you know, we're missing the inflation target, inflation being too high, simply don't think through the consequences that yes, we could have had much higher interest rates in order to try to bring inflation down over, let's say, a two year horizon. That would have meant having a much deeper recession and rising unemployment. And I don't think that was consistent with our remit, and I don't think it would have been remotely sensible.Wage inflation has been remarkably low at around 2% a year. That's a real test of whether we have allowed domestically generated inflation to pick up. We haven't. This is the first time since the Second World War when the United Kingdom has been able to absorb a very large depreciation of its currency without domestically generated inflation wage costs picking up. I think that's an achievement for monetary policy and I think the MPC can be rightly proud of that.So I think what we ought to look at is how far the reasons for the pick-up of inflation are coming from structural factors which are
James Mackintosh, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012part of the rebalancing, for example the depreciation of sterling, and how far they are part of other policy measures that are being put in place which have an inevitable knock on to the price level. Student tuition fees is one. The rise in energy prices was largely the result of increases in costs other than wholesale energy prices. It's not that market gas and electricity prices have gone up, it's that the other costs that are being used to justify the price increases have gone up.These are things over which the Monetary Policy Committee has absolutely no control. Of course we can offset them, but the only way we can offset them is by putting the economy into a deeper recession in order to push down profits and wages below the rather low levels at which wages are rising now. I find it hard to believe that that would be a sensible strategy.You talked about key countries resisting relative price adjustments. Which countries, and what should they be doing?Well I don't want to name individual countries in a press conference. I think you can look at the data and I'm sure the FT will have an adequate databank to enable you to look at which countries have large trade surpluses. But this is a generic point that we have been discussing now for 20 years almost in the world economy. And the failure to tackle this problem is part of the reason why capital flows reached levels which were at least partly, if not significantly, a contributory factor to the crisis.And although these surpluses and deficits appear to diminish in the aftermath or the beginning of the crisis, that was a result of much weaker levels of activity. As people try to return towards a more normal position, you're seeing them open up again. It's particularly obvious in the euro area, and it's creating a climate in
Tim Wallace, City AM:Mervyn King:Jason Douglas, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Paul Fisher:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012which we are beginning to see now some genuine concerns about activity in the world economy.The discussions we had in Mexico at the G20 would not lead you to think that we were moving in a terribly good direction as far as the world economy was concerned.Governor, you've stressed the problems in the Eurozone repeatedly, are you worried by the constant delays putting off the use of the OMT, which is itself quite a short term policy? What do you think the ECB should do to get a grip on the crisis?I think the ECB have made it absolutely clear what they will do, and this now very firmly in the hands of governments.Just a quick question on the Funding for Lending scheme please, I just wonder if the MPC has any particularly concerns about where the money appears to be going - the immediate beneficiary appears to be the housing market I guess; there doesn’t appear to be a lot happening in terms of corporate loans. So I just wondered what your assessment is of that and whether there are things you can do to try and steer more money towards where it appears to be needed?It's still very early days, but let me ask Paul Fisher to comment on where we are in the process?There's a nice box in here which underlines I think some of the timelines around how to judge the Funding for Lending scheme. But just to be clear, we will be publishing on the 3rd December the first set of data relating to drawdowns of cash from the Funding for Lending scheme. So at the moment the banks haven't needed to draw down very much cash from us, and they're at the moment trying to find ways to lend to both companies and households. So
Charlie Bean:Becky Barrow, The Mail:Mervyn King: Spencer Dale:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012it's still far too early to judge where the money is going, we won't see that for quite some time.Even the numbers we publish on the 3rd December will only take you up to the end of September, just two months after the launch of the scheme. So even that will just really give a basis of data and it will be some months after that before we really get a handle. Just think about how long it takes to arrange a loan, even for a mortgage. It's quite a long process between kicking it off and the thing actually being completed and the money actually flowing. And so just - you shouldn't expect these numbers to change too rapidly.One thing I think that's worth saying, because you're particularly focusing on the distinction between corporate and households, is that for households it's a pretty homogenous product that's being sold. Corporates - the bank loans are typically tailored to the particular circumstances, so you would expect the lags to be longer in the case of the corporate side than on the household side. So it's early days to be assuming that everything's going into the household side and not into the corporate side.On Page 26 you say around half of the rise in private sector employment since mid-2010 has been accounted for by part time working, do you think that is a trend that's going to continue and we're going to see more and more people working part time, including many who are working part time unwillingly?Let me ask Spencer to comment on that.So you're quite right, part time employment has increased very substantially and it accounts for around half of the total increase in private sector employment we've seen over the past couple of years. And you're also quite right in saying that, in terms of labour
Claire Jones, Financial Times:Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012market surveys, the number of people who are saying they are working part time, but would prefer to work longer is also increasing rather rapidly, which helps us understand that there's that extra degree of capacity, even if - in terms of employment data had picked up a lot, but we know that a big chunk of those people would like to work longer if they were able to do so.And whether that continues or not I think is a function of growth in the economy and how firms are responding. At the moment they appear to be taking on the extra flexibility with part time workers.If I may just point to you the chart on Page 27, Chart A. A natural instinct may be if a big chunk of this increase in employment is part time that somehow suggests that the increase in total hours worked is perhaps less than the headline employment data would suggest.But what that chart, Chart A on Page 27, makes clear is that despite the considerable increase in part time employment, the amount of hours worked has increased pretty much in line with the amount of people employed. And that's because, although the number of people who are working part time has increased, the amount of hours that they are working have also increased. And so total heads and total hours worked are moving pretty much in line together. And so this sort of mix between part time and full time employment doesn't really help to solve or minimise the sort of underlying puzzle of why demand for labour appears to be so strong at the moment.As someone who has proven a very staunch defender of central bank independence in the past and also someone who has proven very politically savvy in the past, I'm failing to see quite why you seem so unconcerned about not so much the nature, but
Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Sky:Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012the timing of the arrangement on gilt coupons, coming as it does a month before the budget statement.And just on the issue of timing, can you just confirm whether or not this has ever been discussed in the past as an option?Certainly I don't recall it being discussed in the past. I mean, the reason why we don't feel terribly concerned about this is that it doesn't in any way affect our ability to set monetary conditions or control the total amount of asset purchases or sales, or the timing of them. And I do think it would be wrong to create a sort of issue about independence when there's no substance to it.And we've always been very clear that we do defend Central Bank independence when it matters. But this is a question about the timing of cash flows for the Treasury. It's their responsibility; it's their decision; they indemnify the whole of the APF. I think they're perfectly entitled to take that money, provided there is a binding commitment that they'll have to make up the flows further down the road. And it's for them to make that decision and not for us to interfere in it.We are confident that this doesn't affect the monetary position of the UK and it doesn't really have any significance to note. We know that this is equivalent to a certain amount of asset purchases and we will offset that in the scale of purchases that we would otherwise have made. But other than that, I don't think this really adds up to very much.Sorry, I'm going to harp on about this, and excuse me if I'm being dense. But you're saying that a decision which was taken outside of normal Monetary Policy Committee meeting, which was equivalent to a £35bn monetary easing, because if it's equivalent to buying that amount of gilts, then surely it's equivalent to that,
Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Sky:Mervyn King:Ed Conway, Sky: Mervyn King: LaughterPage 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012isn't necessarily something which is monetary policy. I mean is that the point?Well the point is that we did fewer asset purchases than we would otherwise have done, thus offsetting the impact of what the Treasury wanted to do. We are in control of the overall scale of asset purchases and the net effect on the economy. So this is something that we obviously need to know about, we need to take into account, but it doesn't affect our ability to set monetary conditions.But it's just it does change the dynamic, doesn't it, because it means that you're reactive, rather than proactive when it comes to ...... Only as a one off. I mean this is a scheme; the parameters are laid down. I mean the Treasury have not suggested in any way that they're going to come back every month and say, you know, can we hand over some more cash, because there is no basis on which to do that.This is the coupons net of the financing cost in the APF. That would not do because that would indeed be to tell the MPC what the asset purchase facility could carry out. But the Chancellor has been absolutely clear in his letter - completely open and clear about it - that the decision about the scale of asset purchases and the timing of subsequent asset sales is entirely a matter for the MPC.Sorry I don't want to - it's a one word answer? It's not a one word question that's the problem.
Ben Chu, The Independent:Mervyn King:Sam Fleming, The Times (?):Mervyn King:Page 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012Governor, I just want to nail down your view on bank capital and the question of zombie companies in the UK. Do you believe that if banks cleaned up their balance sheets and raised more capital, the economic outlook for the UK would be improved?Well I certainly think that their bank funding costs would fall, yes. But that is an issue to which the Financial Policy Committee will return at its meetings over the next two or three weeks, and I don't want to prejudge what they will say as a result of that.Could I carry on with this QE point again I'm afraid? One of the reasons people are quite interested in this is also because the FLS is also not under the ambit of the Monetary Policy Committee either and again was a joint Bank of England Treasury operation. There really is a sense at the moment that the traditional levers of demand - stimulus tightening and loosening of credit conditions - isn't necessarily in the control of the MPC any more. Is there an argument at least that the FLS should be put either under the ambit of the MPC or the Financial Policy Committee?No, because it is something which provides a much larger than normal subsidy to the banking system, and in that case had to be approved by the Treasury. And I mean you're right that there's a generic point that, when interest rates are close to zero, it is bound to be much more difficult cleanly to distinguish between monetary policy and fiscal policy. But that’s a statement about the state of the economy not about the independence of the central bank.What we've been trying to do is to make sure that, on any given policy instrument for which there may or may not be a good reason for using it, but where there is a fiscal element, then the Treasury are clearly involved and it is not a central bank decision.
Chris Giles, Financial Times:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012And equally where it's purely monetary policy, that it is a Central Bank decision. And I think we've managed to achieve that.And I think these issues which some people rather decry as saying are rather unimportant, bureaucratic, institutional issues, are actually - are of fundamental importance, because the achievement of an independent central bank in bringing inflation down was a real one, and I think it's very important that we do try to anticipate a period when, despite the forecast today, we hope to get back to a more normal world, when it will be very important that the independence of the central bank is very clear and understood, and that some of the policy instruments that are being contemplated now would not be relevant in that world.But where they are relevant, it's important that we discuss the substance of them, and where they involve issues which are in essence fiscal, that the Treasury is indeed clearly involved.What I want to avoid is some of the things that we almost got into in the past where governments were very keen for the Central Bank to carry out what were essentially fiscal actions because they didn't want to take responsibility for it. And that's wrong. And I think it's very important - you see the European Central Bank also being very clear on this - that where there is an issue that's essentially fiscal, governments have to stand up, take responsibility for it.I'm sorry I'm going to harp on again about the same point. Could you just at least help us out about how to describe monetary conditions? Is it that there's £375 billion of asset purchases as the inflation report document states? Is it £412 billion as you've implied today? Or is it that there's £375 billion plus £37 billion initiated by the Treasury, endorsed by the MPC, but not counted by the MPC? Which is the best way of describing it?
Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Faisal Islam, Channel 4:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012The best way of describing these forecasts is that they are conditioned on the £375 billion that the MPC have carried out plus the prospect over a long time period of the flow of coupons minus the financing costs, which over the first year is about £37 billion and falls to much smaller figures in subsequent years.Just going back to the jobs puzzle, it is a puzzle but would you say it’s a good thing that relative to past recessions we’ve had a bigger squeeze in wages, but that may have allowed employment to stay stronger than it has in past recessions? So in a sense the pain of the recession was more evenly spread. Do you think that's fair?Yes I think it is fair, and I think it’s obviously one reason why consumer spending has been weak. We’ve seen a real squeeze on average take home pay with it being very sharp over the last few years. And that has - and you can see money wages growing at very low levels.And I think the story that one hears going around the different parts of the United Kingdom is uniform from companies, which is people are very receptive to the proposition that, if they accept lower wage increases than they would like to have to compensate for the increases in the cost of living, then at least there's a good chance of preserving their job. And I think this has been a much better outcome than would have been the case if we had had people trying to push up money wages and a corresponding big jump in unemployment.Governor, in your opening statement I think you said something like a slow and protracted recovery absent a further exchange rate adjustment or depreciation, it was something like that. Are
Mervyn King:Faisal Islam, Channel 4:Mervyn King:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012you implying that you would welcome a further adjustment of sterling downwards?Well I never call for changes in exchange rates; they are things which are given by the market to central banks. But I think it’s fair to say that the increase in the effective exchange rate of sterling - after all in the last year, just over, 15 months, since the middle of 2011 when the euro area crisis intensified, the effective exchange rate of sterling has risen by 8% and against the euro by 12%. That is not a welcome development.And just quickly, on the ONS announcement that it’s going to launch a new inflation measure including housing, are you anticipating or planning for the use of that in your target? Do you welcome it generally?That is something that the government will have to decide. One of the features of the UK system, rightly in my view, is that the government sets the inflation target and not the central bank. So that's a question for them. It’s always sensible not to mess around with targets too often. But I think - what I hope will happen is that the new measure once it’s produced will provide more information about the inflation process, and will enable you and others to form judgements about exactly what is going on to the underlying inflationary picture.There are of course other changes afoot in terms of altering the - possibly altering the measure of at least RPI, if not CPI, anything that would reduce the wedge between those two, which is not entirely easy to understand, has some merit. And there's no doubt that the methods used by the ONS to calculate the RPI I think would benefit from, you know, they are using some rather outdated measures of index numbers which could certainly be improved.
Linda Yueh, Bloomberg TV:Mervyn King:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012Governor is there a downside to keeping stimulus, whether it’s QE, more open ended like the Fed is doing. So the Fed is very worried about growth being slow, and in your own forecasts you expect output to be below pre-crisis levels, and remain there until the end of the forecast period.So can you just sort of explain why it is that you have a different view on why it is and what stimulus can do in this kind of context? Because it seems as if the Fed has gone very strongly the other way giving an open ended commitment to QE, giving a lot of clarity in terms of the outlook of individual members as to when they expect rates to rise again. And they’ve taken that out to the middle of 2015.I don’t think any of us know when the time will come to tighten monetary policy, and it doesn’t make much sense to pretend that we do. That we’ll see as we go down the road.We have an enormous degree of stimulus. I mean I think all central banks in the major industrialised countries are pursuing very similar policies. All of them have their policy rates at very close to zero, this is historically unprecedented. And all of them have expanded their balance sheets very significantly and by roughly similar amounts in order to be able to purchase assets or lend against illiquid collateral to support the financial sector.So I think the broad thrust of policy is very similar across all the major central banks and I think what you see is certainly here in the Bank of England that we are pursuing and continuing to pursue an extraordinarily high degree of monetary stimulus. And what I have tried to point out in my opening remarks was that, as our economy adjusts to a new position and requires it to be
Guy Faulconbridge, Reuters:Mervyn King:Jason Douglas, Dow Jones:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012rebalanced, there is a limit to how far monetary policy can slow down that rebalancing. That adjustment has to take place.Perhaps this is a stupid question, but do you feel at the moment that sort of the toolbox is pretty much empty? And could you give an indication of whether you have sort of any new instruments or ideas up your sleeve? Thanks.Well I don’t think it’s fair to say that the toolbox is empty, because the major tool that we’re using is being used to an incredibly strong extent. I mean, I think - well not diminishing returns as such, but the fact that Bank Rate hasn’t been changed, it’s been close to zero, doesn’t mean to say it’s ineffective or isn’t actually injecting a very high degree of stimulus. And the same is true of the scale of asset purchases.What is limiting our ability to do more is not on the monetary side, it’s on the real side that the economy has to adjust to a new equilibrium. That is what I think is going to pose the constraint. But we have thought of a great many actions, and I think the Funding for Lending scheme has done what we can do to provide very strong incentives to the banking system to lend more than they otherwise would.What we need now - it’s very clear if you look at the numbers - what the UK economy needs is more demand in the rest of the world to buy goods from the United Kingdom. And that is the key bit that's missing from our attempt to rebalance and that's why the challenge is so great. We’re not the only economy in that position but that's a reflection of the troubles that we face in getting a new adjustment in the world economy as a whole.I'm sorry just one more question on the transfers. I understand that you've been describing how you can offset its effect with
Mervyn King:Jason Douglas, Dow Jones:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012asset purchases, but I'm just wondering if you’d explain a little bit of how it works when your tightening policy. Because I'm just not sure the arithmetic is quite so simple arguably whenever you’re selling assets and it has a negative effect on the public finances and so on, if you see what I'm getting at.Well when we start to tighten policy - we've said already that we think the first moves will be in terms of raising Bank Rate - there will come a point then when Bank Rate turns out to be higher than the average coupon rates on the gilts that we hold. And at that point the flow would turn negative and the Treasury would have to, every three months, reimburse us for that negative cash flow. And that's written into the agreement.Further down the road when we come to sell the gilts, we’ll either make a paper profit or a paper loss, and that will then be reflected in an adjustment either of a further payment to the Treasury or a payment from the Treasury back to the APF. That remains to be seen, the circumstances in which the sales take place.But that's how it will work. It’s very clear, that's why the one thing that did matter in the agreement last week was that it said very clearly in words, binding agreement between the Governor and the Chancellor, that the Treasury would reimburse the Bank when that cash flow turned negative. And that's very clear. Because this is not about anything really substantive, it’s about short term cash management.But there is surely - if the public finances does deteriorate while you’re tightening policy, that will potentially exacerbate the tightening that you’re doing. So I'm just wondering how you will offset that at the time because surely it’s a harder sum to do than the asset purchases thing?
Mervyn King:Facilitator:Phil Aldrick, Daily Telegraph:Mervyn King:Page 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012Well it will only come at a point where we actually want to tighten policy. So I don’t think this gives us any problem. We can always again offset the sales that we’re making to offset the actual inflows. So I genuinely am not concerned about this. I don’t think it affects the ability of the MPC to set policy. We take it into account, we set policy accordingly. And I think this is not the biggest problem we face. We know how to handle this.The big problem is going to be the fundamental one which is now how big should the asset purchase programme be, and then in the future, at what rate do we run it down and sell the gilts. Those are the big decisions that will have to be taken and they’re not easy, it depends on the state of the economy. But this cash management business doesn’t strike me as the major issue at all.I think we’ve got time for perhaps just a couple more. Phil you've got the microphone and after that Svenja has been waiting patiently in the middle there.One of the big obstacles to the readjustment that we need to make is arguably lower rates because we went from conditions of cheap money to even cheaper money and you know the economy is now dependent to a large degree on excessively cheap money. Andrew Sentance, one of your MPC members until recently, has suggested that we set out a schedule for increasing interest rates in the future. I just wondered if you had any thoughts on this issue and whether that was a good idea.Well I said before, and I think the philosophy of the MPC ever since 1997 has been, that we don’t pretend to tell people what our policy will be in future. There doesn’t seem much point in having monthly meetings if you already know what decision you’re going to take.
Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg:Mervyn King:Page 30 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012So the whole point of regular decisions by the MPC is that monetary policy is flexible, it can change when the state of the economy alters and we will enter each meeting with an open mind as to what the policy decision should be at the end of that meeting. We don’t predetermine it. And I think it’s a mistake to try and pretend that we can anticipate what those decisions would be. The whole point of the process is to go into it with an open mind and see where we come out.I also think that, you know, given the current state of the British and the world economies, that suddenly to put up interest rates now to a significant positive level would be a mistake. There would be a tightening of policy; it would raise unemployment; it would turn down the level of output in the UK economy. Just don’t see the point of that.We do need to get to a point where we adjust to the new equilibrium and that's why we think, despite the monetary stimulus that we’re providing, that the broad description of the outlook, there's no certainty at all, but the broad outlook is likely to be one of a sluggish recovery.Now what will actually happen depends on all kinds of shocks and unexpected events that will hit us and the world over the next two to three years. But the big picture is that one which I described at the very beginning.Governor, you touched upon the issue of the inflation target and not changing it. On a broader point, do you think post crisis central banks have diluted their inflation mandate whether that be for reasons of financial stability or social reasons? And if so do you think that's a problem?Sorry diluted their - ?
Svenja O'Donnell, Bloomberg: Mervyn King:Facilitator:ENDPage 31 Quarterly Inflation Report - 14th November 2012Inflation mandate.No I don’t think so at all. I've explained why I think it would have been a mistake not to accommodate some of the price level effects resulting from the fall in the value of sterling and from the higher world energy and food prices. I think that would have been a serious mistake not to have accommodated that. We ensured that wages were rising at no more than 2% a year. That's well below the level, well below the level, that we would normally think of as consistent with the inflation target.I think when, as I hope, conditions return to a reasonably normal level at some indeterminate date in the future, we’ll be able to go straight back again and have the sound of more normal discussions at press conferences that we had six, seven, eight, ten, 15 years ago.And on that note I think we have to end. We are out of time. So thank you all very much indeed for coming today.