Bank of EnglandQuarterly Inflation Report Q&A 8th August 2012
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Page 2 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012Governor, just to clarify you have cut your growth forecasts for this year, but you're expecting a rebound over the following quarters and years. And this is precisely what the Monetary Policy Committee, what the Bank of England has been forecasting in previous years, ever since 2008 you were forecasting a big bounce back for the economy and you've been proven wrong. I mean isn't it fair to say, to borrow your Olympic analogy, that the Bank of England has really fallen off the medals table entirely when it comes to its own forecasting record?No I don't think that's true because if you look back, as I’ve said to you over 20 years now, this isn’t a spot the ball contest where you're trying to hit one point on the picture; this is a question of assessing the balance of risks. We've seen exactly why growth didn't pick up in the way that our central path would have suggested when we made it two years ago, but we are assessing the balance of risks.We know why growth didn't pick up; it's largely to do with the developments in the euro area, combined with the very sharp and unexpected rise in energy and commodity prices that led to the biggest and longest squeeze in real take home pay for almost a century. Those things explain weak growth in the past. Looking ahead not all those factors continue. Of course there is enormous uncertainty about the euro area, which is why we are not forecasting a particular number for the future, we don't do that; we're assessing the balance of risks.But the squeeze on real take home pay is already coming to an end, and we would think it reasonable therefore that the conditions are in place for some gradual pickup in consumer spending and hence gradual pickup in output. We're not forecasting a rapid pickup, indeed as I said in my introductory remarks, it's more likely than not that growth will be below its long
Ed Conway, Sky News:Mervyn King:Laura Kuenssberg, ITV News:Page 3 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012run historical average right through the forecast horizon of three years. That would mean a continuation of pretty low growth for quite a long time.But do you worry that being so spectacularly wrong undermines peoples' faith in the Bank's ability to do its job?No I don't because this - exactly the same question was put to us about inflation and I explained for exactly the same reasons that we could explain why inflation had risen to 5%, or just above, because of the unexpected movement in energy and commodity prices, but that when these faded then inflation would come back down and that was proved correct. So I think the underlying judgements I do not demur from at all. And I think the arguments we put forward - we don't pretend to have a crystal ball to see the future, all we can do is assess the balance of risks.I think this is a reasonable judgement about the balance of risks. It doesn't say that there will be a recovery, it says it in our central view there will be some recovery and there are risks on both sides to that, both on the upside and the downside and we spell out in the Report what those are. Anybody who pretends to know what the future will hold, given the extreme uncertainty connected with events in the euro area, that's the person who should fall off the medals table.Mr Governor, time and again these forecasts have been cut, time and again you've said it's going to take longer to get back to normal. Today you're telling people to be patient, but it's five years this week since the credit crunch. Should people expect that the economy is ever going to recover to how it was before that happened? How long should the public have to wait, or do they have to accept a new reality where people are going to be permanently poorer?
Mervyn King:Laura Kuenssberg, ITV News: Mervyn King:Nils Blythe:Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News:Page 4 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012No I don't think they should accept that at all. We will get back but it's quite impossible to know over what time period. There is no historical precedent for an event of this kind leading permanently to the end of economic growth and I don't think it will here either. We will get back to the same growth rates that we experienced before the crisis, but it will take some time, because again historical evidence suggests that when you get a major financial crisis it does take a number of years to recover.And I think people should bear in mind that, although the crisis in the financial markets started five years ago, the policy measures that were taken then in a sense deferred the impact on spending and output for quite a while. There was then a very sharp downturn in 2008/9 and we're still recovering from that and there is still a long way to go.But we are five years on, might we be looking at a lost decade?When you say a lost decade, I think that we will get back, but I'm not going to pretend that I can predict how the events in the euro area will affect demand for our exports or indeed sentiment in the world economy. Look at how our American colleagues are extremely concerned about events in the euro area 3,000 miles away, we're just across the channel. So these events will impact on us and I think anyone who pretends to know what's going to happen in the euro area over the next two or three years simply is not being realistic.We are not doing well on one question per person I would say Scott.Governor, the forecasts today show inflation below the 2% target in two years' time, even after the extra stimulus taken last month,
Mervyn King:Chris Giles, Financial Times:Mervyn King:Page 5 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012does that not make it more likely that more stimulus will be needed, and if so, what form might it take?Well as I said towards the end of the forecast horizon the balance of risks to inflation around the 2% target is broadly balanced. So that in itself does not suggest an urgent need for further action. And indeed when we met last week we had already put in place an additional set of asset purchases, another £50bn, and the Funding for Lending Scheme is only a week old today. So I think we do need a bit of time to see how they will work.But there are measures that we can take in the future and further asset purchases will clearly be one of them. That's something we will look at each month as we come to it, but without prejudging what the appropriate response would be.Your chart on Page 39, Chart 5.3 is quite extraordinary, for the medium term growth forecast you seem to have - you've dropped the medium term potential growth by about a quarter from about 2.8% to 2.1% without any offsetting reduction in inflation. So you've lowered the trade-off significantly in these forecasts. When is it time to think of something more radical, say central bank financing of fiscal deficits; when is it time that we should need to be thinking about this in this country?Well, again I'm not going to speculate on when measures of that kind will be appropriate. As I said all the way through from when we started asset purchases that a major task for a central bank is to ensure that the right amount of money is created in the economy. For most of the post war period, indeed much of the period before that, that has been contracting the growth rate of money that would otherwise have taken place. Now we've been in a business in the last few years, since the financial crisis, of trying to ensure there was enough money in the economy. I think
Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Page 6 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012we're beginning to see some response to that, the growth rate of broad money has just picked up.If we feel that is creating a problem we will create more money, that's the action that we would take, and we'll look at this each month as we come to it. But we've been very clearly focused on the need to ensure that we don't end up in a position that did occur in the 1930s, certainly in the United States, where broad money fell away sharply, a position you can see today in Greece. We are putting enough money into the economy, that is the direct aim of the Asset Purchase Scheme.Governor, you've spent the past two years effectively providing a kind of monetary counterweight to a fiscal policy we now can see is based on a false premise, i.e. rapid rebalancing. The government's own projections are all wrong, rapid rebalancing hasn't happened. And now you tell us that the £80bn worth of Funding for Lending you see in this box on Page 14, there's no real understanding of whether or not that will work - it might, it might not; it could all go into bank profits. Isn't it time for you to intervene into the combined fiscal and monetary policy of this country and call for a Plan B?No. As I say, if you go back to 2010 when the rebalancing programme was put in place, that looked pretty sensible and I think we can understand why growth has turned out to be weaker than we expected then. It hasn't - growth hasn't been negative to a large extent, no doubt in two or three years' time we'll see the revisions to the GDP data, but the big picture is output has been flat for two years. I think we understand why, it's the problems in the euro area and the squeeze on real take home pay that led to consumption spending being much weaker than we'd expected.
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Page 7 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012One of those factors has now come to an end. I think if you look at the fiscal plans, as set then, they comprised three parts really. One was a path for public spending, one was a set of tax rates that would generate revenues along the central path predicted by the OBR, and the third were the automatic stabilisers, so that if growth deviated from the central path the deficit would turn out to be higher.Those still seem to me exactly the right three things. The automatic stabilisers have kicked in. I think if you look it is certainly true that current spending has actually been cut faster than was planned, by about £8bn, that's not trivial, so that's one of the contributory factors. But that means there's less consolidation to do in future, so there will be less need for fiscal tightening in the future than was thought two years ago. And I can't see any reason why that should change.We've put in place the Funding for Lending Scheme and asset purchases to try to offset the second of the major factors which has dampened growth in the past two years, namely the rise in funding costs to our banks emanating from problems in the euro area and the impact of that on uncertainty and sentiment, animal spirits if you like, which has meant that investment has been postponed. And I think that's an appropriate set of responses to it.But as I said before, I don't think we're in any position to forecast what will happen in the euro area and therefore we're in no position to make any accurate forecasts of what will happen in the UK, and to be honest I don't think anyone else is either.Governor, do you have any reason for confidence in what's happening in the eurozone and the responses they seem to be hinting at, but haven't actually acted out yet?
Mervyn King:Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Page 8 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012Well, I don't think I've got anything to add to what I said at the last press conference. We know what the underlying problems are and we'll see how they tackle them. So I don't really want to add to what I said last time.Just trying to get into what has been incorporated in the new forecast. Is there any positive impact from the Funding for Lending Scheme incorporated in this new forecast and is there any positive or negative impact of the various efforts by the eurozone since May incorporated in this forecast? I mean you did talk about the eurozone tearing itself apart at the last press conference, there have been a lot of summits and now some statements from the ECB since then, how has the development in the eurozone affected the forecast?So I think there are two aspects you've asked there. I don't think anything has happened to change our overall picture about the outlook for the area, some things have got worse, other statements have been made. But I think as Faisal suggested it's a question of actually waiting now for actions and seeing what happens. The underlying problems are still there and how they'll be resolved I think remains to be seen.On the UK, on the Funding for Lending Scheme, I think we felt that the impact of the scheme will offset the rise in funding costs to banks that has occurred since the second half of last year, which we estimate to be around 100 basis points, roughly - it's hard to work out the true marginal funding cost of a bank, but our estimate would be the funding costs have risen by about 100 basis points since the second half of last year. We think the Funding for Lending Scheme will offset that rise in funding costs and do a bit more.
Stephanie Flanders, BBC:Mervyn King:Ben Chu, The Independent:Page 9 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012Now what that will do for actual lending and spending in the economy is hard to judge. And indeed the whole point of the Funding for Lending Scheme is that it has, to be technical, a highly non-linear interaction between the funding costs and the amount of lending that banks do. Put bluntly if they want to get cheap funding from us they have to lend more. So that we put some weight on the incentive effects which are built into the Funding for Lending Scheme.But you do have estimate of the impact of quantitative easing, you know given an extra dose of quantitative easing on growth, there's no similar - you haven't made any estimate?No we haven't - certainly we don't feel in any position to give or publish an estimate of that, no. The scheme is there, we think it will certainly reduce funding costs, we're fairly confident that it will do that, we've given some estimate of what that will be in the Report, but how that reduction in funding costs will feed through to additional lending and then more spending I think is much, much harder to judge. Not least because it is actually a very complex interaction between the extent to which funding costs are pulled down and the amount by which lending increases - the two things are closely linked together through the construction of the scheme. And I don't think it would be sensible to pretend that we have any answer to what quantitative impact that would have.Governor, you said earlier that there is no precedent for an economy sort of coming to a stop after a crisis, that there will always be a recovery it's just a question of time. But in Japan they've had subpar growth for the past two decades after their own asset price bubble burst. Is that an example which the MPC has been considering and are there any lessons to be learnt about monetary policy from Japan, or even perhaps fiscal policy?
Mervyn King:Ben Chu, The Independent: Mervyn King:Page 10 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012Well I don’t you want to give a long talk about the lessons from Japan.	I think it's worth remembering that because of the demographics in Japan one often forgets that income per head has carried on rising. So it's not the case that they've had stagnant incomes which was the question that was put to me earlier. And clearly after the 1930s we saw rapid growth pick up.So I think the evidence is that you know economies can recover, but they do have to deal with the problems created by the financial crisis first. And as I've also said for many, many months, if not years, this has been particularly difficult because it's not a crisis in one country; this is a problem of the international financial system, at least the developed world. And the imbalances in the international financial system, which still continue, were partly responsible for the problems in the first place and we still have to find a way of dealing with those and a microcosm of that is actually what's happening within the euro area.So there's still a long way to go to resolve these imbalances which were part of the fundamental cause of the crisis, which is one reason why it's taking so long.But has Japanese policy been under discussion in the MPC?Well I think we've discussed it on many occasions for a very long time, in fact right back to the beginnings of the MPC itself. But I don't think there's - you know the monetary economics, the theory and practice of it are well known and some of us were writing papers on this at Jackson Hole Conferences way back, well before the crisis occurred, late 1990s.So I think these things are well known, but that doesn't make it any easier to work out how to move out of this. And as I say one of the things that is really problematic, to go back to a question
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King:Page 11 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012that Chris Giles asked earlier on, is the fact that measured productivity growth has been remarkably low and that is not easy to understand. We're doing our very best to understand it, but I don't think there are any simple explanations for it.If we looked at the forecasts from this time last year I think the Bank was then forecasting growth of around 2% plus, now looking at the charts it looks as though this year is going to be negative probably for GDP growth. Is that entirely due to the euro surprise, or is it other factors? Is it some UK factors that have caught you by surprise, weakness in the domestic economy as well the eurozone, or is the sort of unexpected weakness of the economy between now and August 2011 entirely due to the negative shock from the eurozone?Well there's some - I mean clearly the impact of what's happening in the rest of the world, we had the big squeeze on real take home pay and that lowered consumer spending. And it's only in the last few months that we're seeing energy prices fall back. Then I think we would therefore expect in the second half of the year to see some pickup in consumer spending.I also think that the second quarter figure for GDP growth was not a realistic representation of underlying growth. We said well in advance if you remember trying to alert everyone to it, that we thought the impact of the extra bank holiday in Q2 could account for half a percent on GDP. I don't think we've changed our mind on that and therefore we'd expect to see some bounce back in Q3, with consumer spending carrying on some recovery, gentle recovery, in the second half of the year and into next year.So I think there are factors, but I think these are mainly factors which have come from outside. There is clearly an element with
David Barwick, M&I:Mervyn King:Jeremy Warner, Daily Telegraph:Page 12 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012public spending being weaker than was originally planned. But that would account for maybe half a percent of GDP.So I don’t think - you know the big factors are the ones that have come from abroad and in particular the rise in bank funding costs has been equivalent to a significant rise in the effective interest rate in the UK. And we've taken measures to offset that, first by asset purchases, where we've done quite a lot over the past year, and now by the Funding for Lending Scheme.Governor, not to labour the point but just to be clear are you saying that recent comments by ECB President Draghi do not have, in your view, any particular significance with regard to resolving the sovereign debt crisis in the eurozone, you do not ...I'm sure they have great significance, but they are not in themselves a resolution and that will depend on what the euro area as a whole does. And we've been through this for two years now; it's a saga that goes on, and on, and on. And the idea that we've come to an end of it I think seems to me entirely unrealistic, there's a very long way to go. And I don't think that anything we've seen in the past three months has actually changed our judgement about the likely growth of the euro area over the next couple of years. That's all I'm saying.I just wanted to pick up on some of the earlier questions. To many QE has looked at best increasingly ineffective. Is it time to consider some of these more exotic alternatives such as cancelling the bonds, thereby reducing the national debt and creating space for tax cuts, or even you know using the money you're presently applying to bond purchases to give to consumers. Are these definite no-nos for a central bank, or might they at some stage be considered?
Mervyn King:Kathryn Hopkins, The Times:Mervyn King:Page 13 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012Well they are no-nos for the central bank to decide unilaterally certainly. The idea that we would use our power to create money to give it away to our friends, or other people, doesn't seem to me something that you would accept Actually I think you'd be the first person to criticise us for appalling behaviour. So I think there are certain things which central banks cannot do on their own.So I think from our point of view - I don't accept the premise of the question that asset purchases are having diminishing effect, I don't believe that, I think they are perfectly capable of doing it, they create money in the economy and that can have an effect. And in particular it can have an effect in reducing the higher interest rates on risky assets, which are still well above zero, and that's something that we can help to influence.So for the time being that is certainly our instrument and one that we would think of using. Anything else, I think, does move over into the fiscal arena and it would not be for us to take any unilateral action.Governor, the minutes have shown that the MPC has become more open to the idea of cutting interest rates, but wouldn't this hurt building societies, which is the very sector that you're hoping will extend new loans under the Funding for Lending Scheme? So is this not counterproductive or has the Bank conducted some market intelligence to show this is otherwise?No I mean you're quite right, it would damage some financial institutions and it would therefore in all probability have an element at least of it being counterproductive, which is precisely why we haven't cut Bank Rate. And in the minutes of the last meeting we did discus it, but we concluded, at least for the time being, that we thought it would be more counterproductive than
Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Mervyn King:Page 14 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012beneficial, which is why I don't think it's something that we would contemplate doing immediately.If that situation were to change, and it is possible that the impact on net interest margins of the smaller banks and building societies might diminish then that will be something that could be contemplated.But I think that this is really - to some extent it's really neither here nor there. Another quarter point on Bank Rate is not going to be the difference between having a recovery, or not having a recovery. So I think we're in different territory and looking for instruments that will try to get us out of the present difficulties. I don't think a Bank Rate change is going to be a big enough one to make any significant difference. And as I said at present your question is right, I think we would agree with you that it is likely to be more counterproductive than not at this stage.Governor, you pointed out that in the course of the last year inflation has been one piece of good news for you and it's come right down from over 5%. But you did also point out that in the late 2000s it was also over 5% and it came right down. So we've been here before to an extent and we're now hearing various horror stories related to weather and drought and so on in relation to food and animal feed prices, for example. Is there a danger that the Committee has got itself into a mentality whereby every rise in inflation is an unfortunate aberration which will come down; but every fall in inflation can be kind of put in the till and banked for the indefinite future?No, we can account for the movements in inflation and the main thing is to ask the question, to what extent is the current inflation rate a reflection of movements either up, or down, in exceptional factors that we don't think reflect the underlying inflation
Sarah Smith, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Page 15 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012pressures in the economy? And I think we feel that we are getting now, will do later this year, to a point where the underlying inflationary pressures will be much closer to the headline inflation rate and it will be close to target.So I don’t think - you know we can certainly explain what has happened in the past and I think it's totally consistent with our view that underlying inflationary pressures are pretty weak at present and we expect inflation to be close to the target.Now of course if there were to be changes in the world economy and significant increases in energy and commodity prices again then maybe inflation will pick up. But that doesn't seem to be a likely position when the world economy as a whole is weakening, the emerging markets are weakening now, that's what's new in the last year really.So I think the big lesson from all this, which I tried to talk about in a speech nearly ten years ago when I talked about the 'NICE decade' is that the stability of inflation that we enjoyed between the late '90s and 2007 was not likely to be a sustainable one, that there will always be factors from the world that will push inflation up or down. The important factor is for a central bank to look through that and set policy according to the underlying inflationary pressure that we see.You note the effect of the Diamond Jubilee on the second quarter output. Do you anticipate you'll see any kind of effect, positive or negative from the Olympics in the third quarter?Not on the same scale no, and I think - I don't think - well I may ask Spencer to talk about the Olympics.
Spencer Dale:Sarah Smith, Channel 4 News: Spencer Dale:Ainsley Thomson, Dow Jones:Mervyn King:Page 16 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012The Governor is quite right, not on the same scale. We expect if anything a small positive contribution. The impact that that comes from is not through lots of tourists shopping more, it's via the impact of both the ticket sales, which although many of us bought tickets earlier in the year they actually count in terms of GDP in Q3, and also the TV rights to the Olympic Committee are also counted in Q3.There may well be some extra spending from tourism, but as many of us know there has also been travel disruptions, more people are going on holiday, so I think those effects are small. But the contributions from both ticket sales and TV rights may lead to a very small boost to GDP in Q3.A positive long term contribution to the British economy?It may well do but those types of effects are a lot harder to try and work out and I don't think it will have a material impact in our projections.On Page 15 of the Report it says that some banks may use the Funding for Lending Scheme to boost their profits and capital rather than lower lending rates. Is it acceptable that banks use it to boost their profits and is there anything that can be done to prevent that?Well, I mean these banks are in the private sector and the best we can do, it's rather like setting a tax schedule, when we designed the Funding for Lending Scheme parameters we thought of this as rather like designing a tax schedule to give incentives to people. And these incentives will undoubtedly make life easier for the banks because it lowers their funding costs. We designed it in such a way that in order to get the biggest advantage from this scheme they have to expend lending to the real economy, or
Stephanie Sprague, Need to Know News:Mervyn King:Alan Wheatley, Reuters:Mervyn King:Page 17 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012in some cases contract lending by less than they were otherwise planning to do. And that's why we designed the parameters in the way that we did.Governor, hi. Just a question on the Funding for Liquidity Scheme, if it is successful and you seem fairly confident about it, if it is ultimately successful will that reduce the need for more QE, or reduce this debate about a cut in the Bank Rate?Well if it’s successful it will certainly make it less likely that we’ll need to do as much as we might otherwise have done. I think what that means for policy is hard to say. You know I think we believe this will have an effect, certainly in reducing funding costs and certainly in providing very strong financial incentives for banks to lend more to the UK real economy. But I think it’s very hard to go from that statement to say, well this means that we’ll see a recovery, we can’t guarantee that at all. There is a massive uncertainty still in the world economy, no one should underestimate it, and it’s one of the reasons why investment is still weak.Governor given that massive uncertainty, are you surprised that there hasn’t been a more aggressive monetary policy response so far? And given developments locally, I'm thinking for example of the ECB dropping its deposit rate to zero, consideration by other governments of other countries of adopting the Funding for Lending Scheme, do you expect a more determined response in the months to come?Well I think central banks have done an enormous amount. I think it’s very hard to point to any episode in history where central banks collectively have done more. I think this has been an extraordinary period of monetary easing on a scale never before
Lesley Curwen, BBC World Service Radio:Mervyn King:Sam Nussey, Japanese Nikkei Newspaper:Mervyn King:Page 18 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012seen and central banks have still got their foot to the floor in this respect. So we are continuing.It’s not far off four years since Lehman Brothers, are we in a worse state now than you would have expected four years ago?Yes, I think four years ago in the immediate aftermath of Lehman Brothers we would have expected that the position of the banks would be better than it is. I think the loss of market confidence in the banking system that has led their funding costs to stay as high today as they basically were then has been a surprise, and that's one of the reasons why the need for additional monetary easing to offset that higher funding cost to banks has been so necessary.I also think that the whole challenge in the euro area was not - I mean the problems were there in the structure of the euro area very clearly, even in 2008, but they didn’t become visible as current and immediate problems until 2010. And the sharp downturns that we’ve seen, depression in a country like Greece, has only become visible in the last couple of years. So those are the two things I think which have been genuine deviations from what a reasonable central view was four years ago.Given the need to restore confidence in the financial system, could I ask as we go into September what measures you would like to see undertaken to reform Libor?I think there are probably three different aspects of the Libor discussion, one which is for the FSA and other regulators and indeed the Serious Fraud Office which is the extent of wrongdoing in the operation of Libor and how it’s set. That's not a matter for us at all.
Page 19 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012The two things in which we do have an interest are the second and third. The first of those two is the fact that since there is an enormous stock of contracts getting on for half a trillion dollars in assets, which are derivatives linked to Libor; then the question is how can you ensure that the Libor system keeps going in order to support that stock of existing contracts? And I think the one thing that people have often overlooked is that there is no authority, whether it is the FSA or the Bank or the Fed or anyone else, that can unilaterally change the terms on which a private contract has been set. And indeed the attempt to do so might well land their taxpayers with significant bills as a result of legal action.So trying to ensure that Libor is operating smoothly to support the existing stock of contracts is a big challenge and that's one that Martin Wheatley's report will no doubt tackle head on.There is a third aspect, which is the other long term aspect, which is does it make sense to have an index like Libor used to support such a large volume of contracts, either in the derivatives market or for that matter in the markets for home lending or small business lending?I mean I think there there is a real problem that people need to face up to which hasn’t been faced up to, which is that before the crisis it was reasonable to suppose that there did exist something called an interbank unsecured rate, in other words the interest rate at which banks would lend to each other for three or 12 months. And that's because the credit risk that was associated with banks failing was close to zero. So banks were regarded as very much the same as each other, they could borrow and lend in the interbank market at a rate which was, I don’t know, 20 basis points or so above the official policy rate and that was a rate that people wanted to use to index their lending to.
Page 20 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012But since the crisis what’s become very apparent is that there is no such thing as (the) interbank borrowing rate, that the dominant feature in setting interbank borrowing rates now is the credit risk associated with the potential failure of a bank, and that varies from bank to bank. So the idea of having a panel to sort out what is (the) interbank rate no longer makes any sense.Now some people are saying well in that case switch to rates based on transactions. And at first sight that seems attractive, except there aren’t any transactions in many of the maturities on the scale at which the Libor quotes purport to exist. So in many of these maturities and currencies you may get only a few transactions a week, let alone dozens and dozens a day which you might need to construct something based on actual transactions.So I think the fundamental question that people have to face up to is, does it make sense to base hundreds and billions of dollars and pounds of transactions on linking to something that doesn’t actually exist? And that may lead people to try and think about the overnight policy rate as a rate which does always exist. But that's not for me to judge or comment on today; this is a question that people have to think through.But that's for the future design. And the real people who should be thinking hard about it are not the regulators, it’s the people who actually take out the contracts, it’s the people, whether it's pension funds, investors and others who actually borrow and lend at rates indexed to something like this. They’re the people who ought to think through and make the final decision as to what rate they want to index to.
Ed Conway, Sky:Mervyn King:Page 21 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012But what the crisis has done, and I don’t think anyone thought this before the crisis, it’s shown up the weakness in the concept of a single interbank unsecured lending or borrowing rate.It’s really on a similar point which is that are you concerned that all of these scandals around the banking system are potentially exacerbating that funding issue that you've been talking about before? Is Libor or the problems of Standard Chartered and HSBC actually going to have an impact on those funding costs and hence the economy?And also do you feel that we’re being too harsh on the bankers now? Are they getting too tough a ride now or do they deserve what they’re going through in the public eye?Well I'm not going to prejudge - it’s not for me to say what prosecutors or regulators are doing. We’re not the regulator, we weren’t the regulator and we won’t be the regulator for this kind of activity. That will be the FCA in the new regime so it’s not for us to comment on that.All I would say is that it’s very important for people to distinguish between these different episodes. In the Libor one all the regulators involved, whether it be in the United States or in the United Kingdom, produced coordinated publication of reports which came out after the investigation was completed and they had made their judgements.That's very different from what has happened in the Standard Chartered case where one regulator, but not the others, has gone public while the investigation is still going on. And I'm not going to prejudge what that will show and clearly if there's been wrongdoing then action should certainly be taken. But I think it’s
Olly Barratt, CCTV:Mervyn King:Scott Hamilton, Bloomberg News:Mervyn King:Chris Giles, Financial TimesPage 22 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012very different to - one shouldn’t compare the two sets of circumstances, they are very different.It’s impossible to judge. I don’t think we’ve seen enormous effects so far. Clearly there will be if people feel there's a big hit to capital of banks.You talk about the eurozone crisis, the saga having gone on, and on, and on and there having been no action yet. Is your sense that there is about to be some action or are you working on the basis it continues to go on, and on, and on?I think that's a question you have to put to Mario Draghi and my colleagues in the euro area. Only they can decide whether there is going to be action or not, not me. We watch with concern and with great interest and we’ll support them in any way we can, but it has to be up to them.There were increased signs of strain within the coalition government. I know you like to stay clear of any kind of political commentary but are you concerned about any economic impact from the strains, either on confidence or the country's AAA credit rating?As you say I never comment on political developments and I won’t in respect of the question that you asked.Just returning to the productivity issue, you seem to be sort of debunking some of the things that are said that labour hoarding doesn’t seem to be really a very good explanation in your Chart 3.8, that full time employment, high skill employment seems to be what’s been actually coming back. But that then leaves us with an even deeper productivity puzzle of that either it’s got much, much worse, our productivity performance, or the overall GDP
Mervyn King:Charlie Bean:Page 23 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012data is rubbish and it's just not telling us actually what is actually going on. Where do you feel we are in this deep puzzle which is central to monetary policy in the UK at the moment?Well I think your characterisation for the position is spot on. I mean we keep looking at explanations and then finding evidence which doesn’t really support them. It’s very hard to imagine the data can be so badly off that you could explain everything through that. It may in the end just be an accumulation of different factors, and it may be that we’ll see that the employment data in the next 12 months won’t be as robust as they have been. But let me ask Charlie to tell us the answer to the productivity part.Well I'm certainly not going to be able to give you the answer for exactly the reasons that Chris noted. I mean what we are seeing in terms of the behaviour of productivity is way out of line with the behaviour of productivity after previous downturns. It was perfectly reasonable during the early part of the period after the financial crisis to think that what we were going to see was a classic story of labour hoarding in the downturn, firms needing to hang on to overhead labour, hanging onto skilled labour that might be difficult to rehire. And then as the recovery started to gain traction you would expect to see a period of jobless growth while that labour hoarding unwinds, and then eventually firms start taking labour back on again.The thing that was really puzzling and has continued to puzzle is this juxtaposition of really reasonably firm employment growth coupled with very weak output growth. Output has been broadly flat over the past two years yet employment has grown pretty strongly. As the Governor says there could be some measurement error in there whether output in reality is a bit stronger, employment numbers might be a bit weaker. It’s very
Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Page 24 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012difficult though to believe that measurement error can explain everything here, it’s just the gap is too big.So you then start looking at sectorial stories, maybe it’s that job creation has been in particularly low productivity parts of the economy. When you start digging into that, that looks less convincing. If you look at Chart 3.6 for instance on Page 29, that suggests a lot of the job growth has actually been in high skilled occupations so that doesn’t seem to be terribly consistent with the idea that it’s all workers going into very low productivity areas.And it’s the fact that there is hiring going on, it’s not to do with reduced flows into unemployment which is reflected in Chart 3.8 at the bottom of that page which again flags up – there’s a real puzzle here, why are businesses apparently taking on labour when demand is so weak? If they were expecting demand to pick up in the future you might have a coherent story there but of course the longer the weak output growth persists the less plausible that story looks.So we really are in a genuine - where there is a genuine economic puzzle that we don’t really understand. We’re doing lots of work trying to dig deeper into the data, looking into what’s going on in different sectors, but I have to say I don’t think we have the explanation and I don’t think anybody else out there does yet.I just wonder whether you could unpick for me your views on Chart 1.12 on Page 16 Governor. What’s abnormal on that chart? Was it abnormal for rates to be so compressed in 2006/7 or is it abnormal now for the spread between say rates on personal loans or on 95% mortgages, is that spread to be as wide now? I mean what is normal in context of these sorts of spreads and how big an impact do you think Funding for Lending can have on
Mervyn King:Larry Elliott, The Guardian:Mervyn King: Paul Fisher:Ben Chu, The Independent:Page 25 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012compressing those spreads? Because they are amazingly wide by historic standards aren’t they?Yeah and I think that last part of your question answers the first part. This is not normal in the sense of historical experience, these are unusually wide, but it reflects what I said earlier which is extraordinary concern about credit risk for banks. And our banks are exposed to the euro area and they - every now and then some event occurs and they have to put aside more capital to deal with problems that arise.Those spreads are very big. How big an impact can Funding for Lending realistically have on ...?Well let me ask Paul to answer this.Well we know that the Funding for Lending Scheme will affect the banks' funding costs by a range of say 100 to 200 basis points on a comparable basis. So it could have a very material impact on these things now. Now what a bank would normally do when its funding costs go down is pass a large part of that through to its final customers. And so I expect the scheme to have its initial impact we should see some of these lending rates coming down. And, we’ve already seen a first round of announcements by a lot of the banks in that direction, not by as much as I would expect to see eventually but that's the direction in which it’s moving.Sorry picking up from your previous answer and also that question there. You said four years ago you didn’t expect the banks to have such high funding costs now. Can we read into that that if the banks had fully cleaned up their balance sheets and if they'd raised considerably more equity capital that we’d be in a much better position now and we might not need this Funding for Lending Scheme?
Mervyn King:Paul Mason, BBC Newsnight:Mervyn King:Page 26 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012Yeah well I think there is a real element of truth in that. Of course it’s always hard to know how much capital is enough and I think at the time banks would have said that the concern that the market has now about their potential exposures to the euro area would not have been as great back in 2008 as they are today, and so it would have been an unnecessarily high addition to capital.But there's no doubt that right through this crisis people have always underestimated the amount of capital that they would need to convince markets to provide funding at rates close to official rates to reduce these spreads.If you look at the broad money supply chart it’s clear there's a bit of a recovery in the rate of growth. But you yourselves point out that the supply grows by £30bn and over the same period the Bank itself has pumped £125bn into the system. So we’re looking at a broken transmission mechanism and the banks are not lending, it’s a fundamental problem that businesses have, that individuals have.At what point does it not become your policy area to start thinking about, let’s not call them exotic but let’s just call them unconventional measures that actually begin to, as QE was always designed to do, to force that money out into the real economy. I mean is there nothing more you can do to force the money out and to force the money created to be spent rather than saved?Well I don’t think I’d accept that the transmission mechanism is broken because I think the question is what’s the counterfactual? What would have happened had we not done the asset purchases on the scale that we have done so far? And my belief
Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Page 27 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012is that actually the contraction in lending and in broad money would have been much bigger had we not carried out our actions.Now it’s fair to say that perhaps we haven’t done enough. But we’ve taken the view based on our inflation target that so far we’ve got both the asset purchase programme which is now £375bn, we’ve got Bank Rate at 0.5% and now there's the Funding for Lending Scheme. And we judged that in the meeting last week that was enough for the time being. If we need to do more we’ll have to come back and consider doing more.I don’t think it’s a reflection entirely of a broken transmission mechanism. What it’s a reflection of, and you may think this is just playing with words, it’s a banking system that has got itself into deep trouble which the markets now perceive to be seriously undercapitalised relative to the challenges which it faces in the future.And therefore banks are naturally being very, very cautious about expanding their balance sheets. They’re contracting it in order to put themselves back in a position where markets will think that it’s a better risk to lend to this bank than another bank that may have significant exposures to the euro area. And what’s happening of course is this isn’t just one or two banks, it’s the banking system. And it isn’t just the United Kingdom; it’s the developed world as a whole. And that is the problem that we’re facing.And I go back to something I said at the very beginning, I don’t think it’s going to be easy to get out of this through any one country feeling they can do it alone. We got into it together and I think we’ll need to get out of it together.The IMF has said that Britain should have some sort of contingency plan on fiscal policy if growth continues to disappoint
Mervyn King:Faisal Islam, Channel 4 News:Mervyn King:Dan Atkinson, Mail on Sunday:Mervyn King:Page 28 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012or the euro crisis blows up. What sort of things would work from your perspective?Well we’re not actually in charge of fiscal policy so I think it’s a question you should put to the other end of town and not this.Is there a different flavour of fiscal policy that you would respond to more positively as it were? Changing to investment spending, more welfare cuts, things like that.No I don’t think it’s for us to say what should happen to public spending, the composition of public spending or the balance between spending and taxes, that has to be for the fiscal authority not for the Central Bank.You made a very careful reference to the authorities in New York in relation to the Standard Chartered case. Is it your fear that we could be seeing a sort of subdued trade war against British financial services being conducted under the guise of regulation and prosecution across the Atlantic? And if so, what can we do about it?Well again this is straying into regulatory territory that is not for the Bank of England. But overall I don’t judge my colleagues or others in the United States as having any such intention, no. I think you have to regard this as take each case on its merits. We’ve done that, there have been cases in the United Kingdom where the banks have been asked to repay people for misselling; no one has said then that this has been a sort of complete war against the banks. If there have been cases where they have behaved badly and against the regulatory framework then regulators have taken action. I think it’s perfectly reasonable.
Nils Blythe:ENDPage 29 Quarterly Inflation Report - 8th August 2012I think all the UK authorities would ask is that the various regulatory bodies that are investigating a particular case try to work together and refrain from making too many public statements until the investigation is completed. And that seems to me the appropriate time to make clear what the judgement is and what the punishment is.Well I'm afraid that probably is about all that we’ve got time for today. So it only remains for me to thank you all very much indeed for coming.