INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE Wednesday 16 May 2012 Opening Remarks by the GovernorOutput in the United Kingdom has been broadly flat for a year and a half. It remains more than 4% below its level at the start of 2008. Inflation has fallen back sharply from its peak in September last year but remains well above the 2% target, and is more likely than not to be above target until the middle of next year. Weak growth and high inflation have been the unavoidable consequences of the financial crisis, developments in global commodity prices, and the need to rebalance our economy. That has been painful for everyone in our society.The challenge facing the MPC is to navigate a route back to normality.The outlook for growth presented in today’s Report is weaker than in February, and the outlook for inflation is higher in the near term. Rather than focusing on quarter to quarter movements in output or inflation, which are impossible to judge, the MPC focuses on the bigger picture. That bigger picture is of a gradual recovery in output, and of subdued domestic cost pressures meaning that inflation is likely to fall back as external influences fade. The labour market data published this morning are consistent with this picture.The ONS estimates that the economy shrank a little in both the first quarter of this year and the final quarter of last year. Over the past year or so, two factors have hampered the recovery and rebalancing by more than expected. First, higher-than-expected world commodity and energy prices have squeezed real take-home pay, dampening consumption growth. Second, credit conditions, far from easing, have in some cases become tighter. The direct and indirect exposures of UK banks to the euro-area periphery have affected funding costs as the challenges of tackling the indebtedness and lack of competitiveness in those countries have intensified.The economy will continue to face strong headwinds over the forecast period. Underlying concerns about balance sheets, especially in the financial sector with its exposure to the euro area, mean that the path of recovery is likely to be slow and uncertain. The Committee’s
2judgement about the outlook for four-quarter GDP growth is summarised in Chart 1 on page 6 of the Report. It is based on the assumptions that Bank Rate follows a path implied by market interest rates, and that the size of the asset purchase programme remains at £325 billion. In the near term growth is subdued, but the recovery gradually strengthens as consumption is supported by a gentle recovery in real take-home pay, investment picks up from its current low levels, and there is continued support from net trade. By the end of the forecast period there is judged to be as much chance that growth will be above as below its long term average rate.In this Report the outlook for growth is somewhat weaker than in February. In the near term that reflects unexpected weakness in the recent data, and higher inflation leading to a slower than expected recovery in real take-home pay. In the medium term it reflects a judgement that the weakness in productivity growth will prove to be more persistent. These changes in the outlook for growth are, however, small in the context of the overall uncertainty we face. The big picture remains one in which the economy gradually recovers.The biggest risk to the recovery stems from the difficulties facing the euro area, our main trading partner. As in recent Reports, the Committee believes that there is no meaningful way to quantify the most extreme possible outcomes, and they are therefore excluded from the fan charts. But even the threat of those more extreme outcomes is enough to affect the outlook for the UK, through its effect on bank funding costs, asset prices, including the exchange rate, and the confidence of households and businesses. And such effects are incorporated in the fan charts.At 3.5% in March, CPI inflation remains well above the 2% target. That largely reflects past increases in energy and import prices. In contrast, low rates of wage increases have ensured that domestic cost pressures are subdued. Chart 3, on page 8 of the Report, shows the Committee's best collective judgement of the outlook for CPI inflation. It is based on the same assumptions about monetary policy as underlie Chart 1. The Committee judges the near-term outlook for inflation to be higher than in February, in part because of higher energy prices and indirect taxes, and in part because cost pressures from past rises in global commodity prices and weak productivity appear likely to have a greater impact on inflation over the next year
3than we had expected.	But underlying domestic inflationary pressure is likely to remain muted as slack in the labour market continues to restrain wages. As a result, inflation is likely to fall back to around the target in the second half of the forecast period.Inflation in recent years has been high mainly because of the increase in VAT, the depreciation of sterling, and the increases in energy and commodity prices. The MPC could have sought to counteract this upward pressure on inflation by pushing down on growth and employment, and hence wages. But to do so in the aftermath of a deep recession would have led to a deeper and more prolonged downturn, contrary to our remit.The choice facing the MPC continues to be a difficult one. And the task is made harder by the degree of uncertainty about the paths that output and inflation will follow. But the big picture is clear, and hasn’t changed since February. We are navigating through turbulent waters, with the risk of a storm heading our way from the Continent. Uncertainty can sometimes add a certain spice to life – as we saw vividly in the conclusion to the Premier League season at the weekend – but it has the opposite effect on the economy. We don’t know when the storm clouds will move away. But there are good reasons to believe that growth will recover and inflation will fall back. Along the way we will no doubt be buffeted by winds from unexpected quarters. But the MPC will continue to chart a course through this stormy weather, back to the calmer waters of steady growth with inflation close to target.