INFLATION REPORT PRESS CONFERENCE WEDNESDAY 13 FEBRUARY 2002 OPENING REMARKS BY MERVYN KINGGood morning everyone.Despite the sharp slowdown in the world economy, the UK economy continues to expand and growth has been faster than in the other G7 economies. Inflation has remained close to target. There are now positive signs of a prospective recovery in the world economy later this year. There are, of course, risks - both at home and abroad. But the outlook for the UK economy remains one of growth close to trend and inflation close to target.In the five years to 2000, the G7 economies grew, on average, by over 3% a year. But last year the annual growth rate fell to around 1⁄2%, and all economies were affected. The slowdown has been sharp, and synchronised across countries. But there are now tentative signs of an upturn. The inventory correction is well advanced. And private consumption has held up in a number of countries, including the United States where business confidence has recovered following the terrorist attacks in September. In the euro area too there have been signs of a pick up in the forward-looking survey indicators. Japan remains in recession. But there has been little contagion from the crisis in Argentina. Most important, low inflation has made it possible for monetary policy to be used in a prompt and pre-emptive fashion.In the UK overall GDP rose marginally in the fourth quarter of last year, depressed in part by weak energy output, although over the year as a whole growth was close to 2%. That largely reflects strong private and public consumption. The contrast between buoyant consumption and weak net trade is reflected in the imbalances between domestic demand and output, on the one hand, and between different sectors of the economy, on the other. Last year final domestic demand growth exceeded output growth for the sixth year in a row. Manufacturing output fell by 1.7% in the fourth quarter of last year, and is now 51⁄2% below its level a year ago. In contrast, the output of the services sector is estimated to have risen by 0.9% in Q4, 31⁄2% up on a year ago. The difference between the growth rates of manufacturing and services is now at its widest since 1981.
2It is not easy to know how quickly these imbalances will subside. The data for consumer confidence, household credit growth, prices and quanties in the housing market, and the size of mortgage equity withdrawal, all suggest that consumption will remain buoyant in the short term. The recent strength of consumption reflects much higher spending on durable goods – which rose at its fastest rate since 1988 - than on non-durables. If, as we might expect, the balance between the two returns to something closer to normal then consumption growth is likely to slow in the wake of weaker real income growth. And that view is embodied in the Committee’s central projection.In the labour market, the demand for labour seems to be easing. Total hours worked have fallen, although employment continues to rise, suggesting that the turn round in the market is not, as yet, very marked. Earnings growth has also fallen, and quite sharply in this morning’s data. But that is the result of a fall in bonuses; regular pay growth was unchanged. And there may well be further low numbers for earnings growth as we pass through the main bonus season.Signs of cost pressures are few and far between. Commodity prices have edged up from their depressed levels of last autumn, but oil prices have remained stable. Retail price inflation, as we saw in the data released yesterday, is likely to be volatile over the next few months because of factors such as seasonal food and petrol prices. Yesterday’s rise reflects these volatile factors but was not confined to them. The forecast was finalised before the Committee saw the RPI data, although the RPI Outlook was available to the Committee on the morning of its decision last week. Some increase in inflation in January was expected.The Committee’s latest projections for output growth and inflation are shown in charts 1 and 2 on page iii of the Report. As usual, these are conditional on the official interest rate of 4% remaining unchanged over the two-year forecast horizon. Let me remind you that output growth – shown in chart 1 – is measured as the increase in output over the previous four quarters. The slowdown at the end of last year and the beginning of this is reflected in Chart 1. But the pick up in the world economy, and the reductions in interest rates made by the MPC last year, produce a central projection for quarterly output growth
3in the UK which is close to trend for much of the forecast horizon, and lead to the V- shaped profile for the four-quarter growth rate shown in Chart 1.The best collective judgment of the Committee on the outlook for inflation is shown in chart 2 on page iii. RPIX inflation is expected to lie somewhat below the target in the short term, although there may be further volatility. It is then expected to pick up slowly, rising towards the target level at the end of the forecast horizon.There are three main risks to the outlook. First, following the anticipated recovery from a sharp inventory cycle, the world economy could be vulnerable to weakness in consumption further ahead. Second, domestic imbalances, and the associated levels of debt, pose some risks to consumption and investment at home. Third, and related to the previous two risks, imbalances between investment and savings, both at home and abroad, raise questions about the sustainability of the present constellation of exchange rates. Taken together, these generate an overall downside risk to the output projection, but, because of their implications for the sterling effective exchange rate, lead to an upside risk to inflation.Yesterday’s inflation data should help everyone to recognise that the difference between the target and the central projection in chart 2 is very small in comparison with the month to month volatility of RPIX inflation. Short-run movements in inflation are normal, monetary policy cannot easily affect them, and the MPC needs to look through them to form a judgment about the degree of inflationary pressures further ahead. With the central projection at the two-year horizon marginally below target, but rising, and with the risks on the upside, the MPC decided to keep interest rates unchanged when it met last week. The Committee remains vigilant and will continue to set interest rates to keep prospective inflation on track to meet the target of 2.5%.